                                         FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats
                                         RAFAEL DUTRA, CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany
                                         RAHUL GOPINATH, CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany
                                         ANDREAS ZELLER, CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany
arXiv:2109.11277v3 [cs.SE] 27 Sep 2023




                                         Effective fuzzing of programs that process structured binary inputs, such as multimedia files, is a challenging
                                         task, since those programs expect a very specific input format. Existing fuzzers, however, are mostly format-
                                         agnostic, which makes them versatile, but also ineffective when a specific format is required.
                                            We present FormatFuzzer, a generator for format-specific fuzzers. FormatFuzzer takes as input a binary
                                         template (a format specification used by the 010 Editor) and compiles it into C++ code that acts as parser,
                                         mutator, and highly efficient generator of inputs conforming to the rules of the language.
                                            The resulting format-specific fuzzer can be used as a standalone producer or mutator in black-box settings,
                                         where no guidance from the program is available. In addition, by providing mutable decision seeds, it can
                                         be easily integrated with arbitrary format-agnostic fuzzers such as AFL to make them format-aware. In our
                                         evaluation on complex formats such as MP4 or ZIP, FormatFuzzer showed to be a highly effective producer
                                         of valid inputs that also detected previously unknown memory errors in ffmpeg and timidity.
                                         CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Software testing and debugging; Translator writing
                                         systems and compiler generators; Parsers; Syntax.
                                         Additional Key Words and Phrases: structure-aware fuzzing, file format specifications, binary files, grammars,
                                         parser generators, generator-based fuzzing

                                         1   INTRODUCTION
                                         Feedback-directed fuzzing tools such as AFL [58] and libFuzzer [43] have shown great success in
                                         finding bugs and vulnerabilities in widely used software. Such tools are generally format-agnostic,
                                         meaning that they assume no knowledge about the input format when producing or mutating
                                         inputs. This makes them easy to set up and deploy. However, it also limits their usage to settings in
                                         which (1) Sample input files to be mutated are available; (2) Instrumentation and feedback from the
                                         program under test is available; (3) The cost of producing myriads of invalid inputs is bearable.
                                            The alternative to a format-agnostic fuzzer is to create a format-specific fuzzer, making use of
                                         format knowledge to produce valid inputs. However, creating such a fuzzer comes with considerable
                                         effort, in particular when one wants to reuse the guidance and analysis capabilities of feedback-
                                         directed fuzzers.
                                            In this paper, we present a novel approach that combines the flexibility of format-agnostic fuzzers
                                         with the efficacy of format-specific fuzzers. Our FormatFuzzer framework leverages existing binary
                                         templates—specifications for input formats, from JPEG to PCAP—to produce or mutate valid file
                                         inputs, even in black-box settings where no guidance from the program is available; and integrate
                                         with arbitrary format-agnostic fuzzers such as AFL to make them format aware. In all settings,
                                         using FormatFuzzer increases coverage in the program under test, covering code not reached by a
                                         format-agnostic fuzzer, and thus increasing the chance of detecting bugs and vulnerabilities.
                                            How does FormatFuzzer work? The inputs for FormatFuzzer are existing input specifications.
                                         The 010 Editor [47] is a commercial editor which allows users to view and edit binary files with
                                         detailed structural information, as shown in Figure 1. To parse its inputs, the editor relies on human
                                         written specification files, known as binary templates [46] to specify the different sections of a file.                       111
                                         Those binary templates are written in a C-like language and have been community-developed for
                                         Authors’ addresses: Rafael Dutra, rafael.dutra@cispa.de, CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Stuhlsatzenhaus 5,
                                         Saarbrücken, Germany, 66111; Rahul Gopinath, rahul.gopinath@cispa.de, CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security,
                                         Stuhlsatzenhaus 5, Saarbrücken, Germany, 66111; Andreas Zeller, zeller@cispa.de, CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information
                                         Security, Stuhlsatzenhaus 5, Saarbrücken, Germany, 66111.
    111:2                                                        Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller




                                    Fig. 1. 010 Editor displaying a PNG file.


1   typedef struct {
2       byte btRed;
3       byte btGreen;
4       byte btBlue;
5   } PNG_PALETTE_PIXEL;
6
7   struct PNG_CHUNK_PLTE (int32 chunkLen) {
8       PNG_PALETTE_PIXEL plteChunkData[chunkLen/3];
9   };
                                    Listing 1. PNG binary template (extract).



    over ten years, resulting in a repository of more than 200 different specifications for popular binary
    file formats [45]. So, for many popular fuzzing targets, a binary template which describes its input
    format is already available online. For instance, the majority of bugs listed under AFL’s bug trophy
    case [58] come from programs which process popular binary formats for which there is a public
    specification. Of special interest are multimedia file formats, such as images, audio or video, which
    often come from untrusted sources, and therefore represent a large attack surface, with potentially
    serious security consequences.
        As an example of a binary template, consider Listing 1, showing an excerpt of the original
    template for PNG files. We see that (like a C program), it defines types such as PNG_PALETTE_PIXEL
    consisting of three byte values. The following struct fragment defines a chunk of such pixels
    named PNG_CHUNK_PLTE, whose overall (parameterized) length is chunkLen. The full PNG format
    contains dozens of such chunk definitions, all formalized within the PNG binary template; these also
    include executable code that computes context-sensitive information such as checksums (whose
    inference is a major roadblock for format-agnostic fuzzers).
        FormatFuzzer takes as input one of these binary templates—say, a PNG template. It then compiles
    it into:
        (1) A highly efficient generator that produces outputs in the format specified (i.e., a PNG fuzzer);
            and
        (2) A parser that reads in existing inputs in the format specified (i.e., a PNG parser).
FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats                                                      111:3


                    1                     2
                        Binary Template       FormatFuzzer                       Generating
                                          3
                                                                                     Inputs
                                               Generator
                                               C++ Code

                    5                     4                  6                     7
                                                                                         Program
                         Random Bytes          Generator            Fuzz Input
                                                                                        under Test




                                          8                                        15
                                                Parser                                  Execution
                                               C++ Code                                 Feedback


                    10                    9                  11
                         Sample Input            Parser           Decision Seed



                                                             12                    14
                                                                                    Format-Agnostic
                     Parsing +                                      Mutator
                                                                                      Fuzzer (AFL…)


                     Mutating                                13
                     Inputs                                       Mutated Seed



Fig. 2. FormatFuzzer overview. From a binary template (1) that specifies an input format 𝑭 , FormatFuzzer (2)
generates C++ code (3) that compiles into a highly efficient generator (4) for 𝑭 . In a black-box testing setting,
the generator uses a source of random bytes (5) to generate fuzz input (6) in the format 𝑭 for the program
under test (7). From the same binary template, FormatFuzzer also generates C++ code (8) for a parser (9)
for 𝑭 . In a mutation setting, this parser transforms a sample input (10) into a decision seed (11), which encodes
the decisions made while parsing the sample into a string of bytes. FormatFuzzer can mutate this seed (12)
(for example, replacing one chunk); feeding the mutated seed (13) into the generator yields a mutated fuzz
input still conforming to 𝑭 . Finally, for an evolutionary setting, the mutator can also be a format-agnostic
fuzzer (14) such as AFL, which then mutates and evolves seed strings based on execution feedback (15). Such
a fuzzer can also apply out-of-format mutations to the fuzz input directly.



The parser can immediately be used in existing parser-enhanced fuzzers such as AFLSmart [39],
effectively giving us a format-specific fuzzer that evolves, say, given PNG seed inputs; this can be
repeated with hundreds of different templates, producing hundreds of format-specific, coverage-
guided fuzzers. The generator, on the other hand, can be used as a standalone generator of inputs
that all conform to the format specifications. This is useful in black-box settings, where feedback-
driven fuzzers cannot be applied. Furthermore, the combination of parser and generator allows
FormatFuzzer to mutate existing inputs in a way that ensures their validity. Finally, FormatFuzzer
allows to integrate format-agnostic fuzzers and make them format-aware, either by having them
apply smart (format-aware) mutations on the inputs, or by having them mutate decision seeds—
strings of bytes that represent decisions taken during parsing and generating. Both integrations
bring together the best of format-agnostic guidance and format-aware mutations, and increase the
reach of format-agnostic fuzzers.
111:4                                                      Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller


    Nevertheless, some manual effort is still required. The hundreds of existing binary templates work
well for parsing; but to make effective generators, one has to further refine them. These refinements,
however, are easy to write and the feature-full language of binary templates is rich enough to
express virtually all needed features of binary file formats, including length fields, checksums,
complex structures and constraints between variables. Extending a binary template and compiling
it is a one-time effort for each format; and once one has, say, a full-fledged PNG specification, one
gets a PNG fuzzer, a PNG parser, a PNG mutator, and a variant of your favorite format-agnostic,
feedback-directed fuzzer that produces thousands of valid PNG files per second—with only a fraction
of the effort it would take to build such a fuzzer from scratch.
    In the remainder of the paper, we detail the techniques behind FormatFuzzer and how they
improve the state of the art in fuzzing. Specifically, we make the following contributions:

    (1) A novel description format for generating binary inputs. There are hundreds of
        well-curated binary templates available that describe just as many binary file formats. In
        Section 2, we describe their structure; and in Section 3 we extend them with new features
        for generating valid inputs.
    (2) Decision seeds to synchronize generators and parsers. FormatFuzzer takes binary
        templates to produce C++ code (Figure 2) that compiles (Section 4) into specialized and
        highly efficient generators and parsers, including several context-sensitive features (Sec-
        tion 3). Generator and parser synchronize over decision seeds—a sequence of bytes reflecting
        decisions taken during generating or parsing (Section 5). After parsing an input, the resulting
        decision seed allows the generator to re-take the same decisions (but now for generating),
        which reproduces the input exactly. As far as we know, FormatFuzzer is the first frame-
        work to enable this bidirectional transformation between decision seeds and binary files.
        This allows us to apply novel smart mutations (Section 6.2) over decision seeds which are
        obtained from a high-quality corpus of binary files.
    (3) Making format-agnostic fuzzers input-format aware. Mutating bytes in the decision
        seed allows to explore the entire domain of inputs. If a format-agnostic fuzzer is thus set to
        mutate and evolve decision seeds, FormatFuzzer can then translate any such mutation into
        a valid binary input. This enables a generator-based approach for integrating FormatFuzzer
        with any format-agnostic fuzzer, leveraging its mutation and evolution strategies (Section 6).
        In addition, FormatFuzzer provides novel smart mutations, which operate over decision
        seeds and can therefore respect contextual information in mutated files. This enables
        another highly effective approach to improve any format-agnostic fuzzer, by leveraging the
        format-specific smart mutations provided by FormatFuzzer (Section 6).
    (4) A detailed evaluation of all FormatFuzzer elements. We evaluated FormatFuzzer
        (Section 7) on 10 different programs and file formats (PNG, JPEG, GIF, MIDI, MP4, ZIP,
        PCAP, AVI, WAV, BMP) and found that:
         (a) FormatFuzzer very quickly produces valid inputs, as standalone generator as well as
             mutator.
         (b) FormatFuzzer integrates well with format-agnostic fuzzers such as AFL, reaching
             lines otherwise not covered. In our initial fuzzing experiments, FormatFuzzer detected
             a number of previously unknown (and potentially exploitable) segmentation faults and
             aborts in ffmpeg and timidity.

FormatFuzzer is available as open source and enjoys a quickly growing user community. For
details, see https://github.com/uds-se/FormatFuzzer.
   FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats                                        111:5


   2   THE BINARY TEMPLATE LANGUAGE
  We start our exploration into FormatFuzzer with a description of its central input—binary templates.
  The binary template language [48] was designed to fully specify any binary format. Its syntax and
  semantics are close to the C programming language, the main difference being that it describes not
  programs, but data formats. Its main elements are:
  Variable (input data) declarations. Every variable declared in the binary template is directly
         mapped to a sequence of bytes in the input. If a template starts with uint32 len; char
         s[len]; int64 n;, this means that the input consists of
           (1) a 32-bit unsigned integer (len) in the first four bytes;
           (2) an array of characters of length len in the next len bytes; and
           (3) a 64-bit integer (n) in the next four bytes.
         Note that array sizes can be any expression including variables and functions; this allows
         to specify variable lengths.
  Local variables. When a variable is defined with the keyword local, it is not mapped to input
         contents, but acts like a traditional variable stored in memory. It can be freely used in
         computations and control-flow decisions by the binary template.
  Type declarations. As in C, one can define types using the typedef and struct constructs.
         Listing 1 defines a type PNG_PALETTE_PIXEL, composed of three individual bytes.
         Besides native types (such as uint32 and string) and struct types, variables can also
         have enum types, where the list of possible values is explicitly provided.
  Parameters. Unlike C, type and variable declarations can take parameters. The definition of
         PNG_CHUNK_PLTE in Listing 1, for instance, is parameterized with a chunkLen parameter,
         which sets the size of the contained array.
  Conditionals. Binary templates incorporate all the usual control-flow constructs (if, else, while,
         switch, etc.); their bodies would again contain variable declarations. These are used to
         express alternatives and loops in the input. For instance, to express a sequence of chunks,
         whose actual type depends on a header, we could use a loop and conditions as in Listing 2.
 1 while (!FEof()) {
 2     uint32 length;
 3     char type[4];
 4     if (type == "IHDR")
 5         PNG_CHUNK_IHDR ihdr;
 6     else if (type == "PLTE")
 7         PNG_CHUNK_PLTE plte(length);
 8     /* ... */
 9     if (type == "IEND")
10         break; /* break out of while loop */
11 }
                               Listing 2. Loops and alternatives in a binary template.


   Built-in functions. The while condition in Listing 2 invokes a function named FEof() to check
          for an end-of-file condition. The language provides several such functions to allow for
          greater control during parsing, making the language expressive enough to support complex
          constructs from hundreds of binary formats. Examples include FTell(), which returns
          the current file position, FSeek(), which allows jumping to a different file position for
          non-sequential parsing, and FileSize(), which returns the file size. Advanced lookahead
          functions such as FindFirst() and FindAll() allow searching the file for specific tokens.
111:6                                                      Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller


       Lookahead functions allow the parser to peek at a few later bytes in the file without
       advancing the file position, and can be used for control-flow decisions. For instance, peeking
       at the first bytes of a struct ahead of time can help determine which struct type should
       be parsed. Examples of lookahead functions are ReadByte() and ReadBytes().
       Besides I/O functions, a multitude of string and math functions is available, including
       conversion and checksum algorithms.
Custom functions. The language also allows defining own functions, which follow C function
       syntax and semantics, again allowing variable declarations for describing input data. As all
       the operators from C are also supported, this makes binary templates a Turing-complete
       description of input formats.
Error handling. In the case of irrecoverable parsing errors, the language also allows early termi-
       nation, using a top-level return statement.
A full definition of syntax and semantics of the binary template language is available online [48].
   We would like to note that our choice for binary templates as the base for FormatFuzzer is
purely pragmatic. Binary templates have been shown to be able to precisely document hundreds of
formats; they are reasonably well documented; and as we will show in this paper, they are not too
hard to adapt for effective fuzzing. Whether all the subtleties of input formats can be specified in a
more elegant or useful way is yet to be proven.

3   BINARY TEMPLATES FOR GENERATION
In order to use binary templates to generate new files from scratch, some decisions need to be made
during the generation process. Most notably, a value will have to be chosen for every variable that
is declared, and also for every lookahead function that is called. If such values were to be chosen
uniformly at random from the entire range of possible values (for example, 232 possible values
for a uint32), most variables would end up having nonsensical values, rendering the file invalid.
Therefore, we extend the language of binary templates in a number of aspects:
Choices of valid values. Our first extension allows the specification of an array of valid values
      to choose from. When a variable is declared, this array of choices can be assigned as an
      initialization list. Line 11 of Listing 3 tells the generator to pick a value for bits uniformly
      from five possible choices.
Enumerations. To handle enumerations, the generator chooses a value uniformly from the set
      of the enumerated values (e.g., PNG_COLOR_SPACE_TYPE in Listing 3), which is usually the
      appropriate behavior. But it is also possible to specify a different set of choices through an
      initialization list.
Lookaheads. For lookahead functions, we extend the language to allow a new argument specifying
      the possible values to choose from. One example is the array colors passed as an argument
      to the ReadByte() call in Line 9 of Listing 3.
Allowing invalid choices. Finally, we also allow the generator to deviate from the specified
      behavior and pick any value from the entire range of 28 possible values for ubyte with
      a small probability of about 1%, by performing an action that we call an “evil” decision.
      Such evil decisions are enabled by default, but can be turned on and off during generation
      by calling a function SetEvilBit(), which takes as input the new value for the flag and
      returns the old value. When enabled, they can give the fuzzer greater diversity of generated
      files by allowing the fuzzer to explore a small number of invalid choices during generation.
   Let us now put these extensions into action and show what changes had to be made to the
binary template in order to support the generation of valid inputs. Our running example, PNG,
is representative of the changes that are required for other file formats as well. This section
     FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats                                          111:7


 1   typedef enum <byte> {
 2       GrayScale=0, TrueColor=2, Indexed=3, AlphaGrayScale=4, AlphaTrueColor=6
 3   } PNG_COLOR_SPACE_TYPE;
 4
 5   typedef struct {
 6       uint32 width <min=1, max=24>;
 7       uint32 height <min=1, max=24>;
 8       local byte colors[] = { GrayScale, TrueColor, Indexed, /* ... */ };
 9       switch (ReadByte(FTell() + 1, colors)) { /* color_type */
10       case GrayScale:
11           ubyte   bits = { 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 };
12           break;
13       case TrueColor:
14           ubyte   bits = { 8, 16 };
15           break;
16       case Indexed:
17           ubyte   bits = { 1, 2, 4, 8 };
18           break;
19       /* ... */
20       }
21       PNG_COLOR_SPACE_TYPE color_type;
22       PNG_COMPR_METHOD compr_method;
23       PNG_FILTER_METHOD filter_method;
24       PNG_INTERLACE_METHOD interlace_method;
25   } PNG_CHUNK_IHDR;
     Listing 3. Contents of the IHDR chunk, where bits depends on color_type. Changes made to enable
     generation are highlighted in blue.




     exhaustively describes all the changes which were needed to generate valid PNGs. For any format
     we have seen so far, all its modifications also fall into the classes described here. All our changes
     are highlighted in blue in the code listings.

     3.1   Magic Values
        The simplest common feature of binary formats is the use of magic values, where certain bytes
     in the file need to have a specific value. For example, a PNG file needs to start with a signature
     containing the bytes "\x89504E470D0A1A0A". In the original PNG template, there was already
     a check which compares the signature to the expected value and terminates the template if the
     signature is invalid, as shown in Listing 4. In this case, FormatFuzzer is able to automatically
     mine such comparisons (with operators != or ==) when analyzing the source code of the binary
     template and remember the magic values that should be used. For example, the value 0x8950 will
     be remembered as a good value to use for index 0 in the array btPngSignature. Such comparisons
     can also be mined inside struct definitions and functions.
        The only change made to the binary template for the signature generation was adding two calls
     to SetEvilBit(), which disable evil decisions temporarily for the signature generation, re-enabling
     them afterwards. This essentially marks the generation of the sig variable as strict, which is useful
     because any file with an incorrect PNG signature is not a valid PNG file and would be immediately
     rejected by the target program.
     111:8                                                          Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller


 1   typedef struct {
 2       uint16 btPngSignature[4];
 3   } PNG_SIGNATURE;
 4
 5    local int evil = SetEvilBit(false);
 6   PNG_SIGNATURE sig;
 7    SetEvilBit(evil);
 8   if (sig.btPngSignature[0] != 0x8950 ||
 9           sig.btPngSignature[1] != 0x4E47 ||
10           sig.btPngSignature[2] != 0x0D0A ||
11           sig.btPngSignature[3] != 0x1A0A) {
12       Warning("File is not a PNG image.");
13       return -1;
14   }
                           Listing 4. PNG signature: the magic bytes are mined automatically.



     3.2     Size Fields
     Another common feature in binary formats is the presence of size fields, whose value correspond
     to the size of a certain structure in the file, or some particular position or index inside the file.
     Such size fields are context-sensitive features, and binary formats using such features are not
     expressible using context-free grammars. It is particularly crucial that size fields are generated
     correctly, because a wrong value for a size field would completely change the interpretation of the
     remaining bytes of the file.
        In the PNG format, the chunk length is the first field in every chunk, as seen in Line 2 of Listing 5.
     There, we have extended the definition of the length variable with additional metadata min=1 and
     max=16 to restrict the choices of values for this variable to a small range. This is important since
     this variable will be used as the length of an array, as seen in Line 11 of Listing 5. If no such bounds
     are specified, FormatFuzzer still samples values for integer variables from a skewed distribution
     that prioritizes small positive integers, but still allows arbitrary large or negative integers with a
     smaller probability.
        One challenge in generating PNG chunks which is also common in other file formats is that the
     length field appears before the data it refers to. And it is not always possible to predict beforehand
     what the length of certain data should be before generating that data. In addition, a bad choice for
     length could lead to the length of some array becoming too large or negative, such as when an
     integer underflow happens in Line 4 of Listing 6. The strategy we use to tackle those issues is to
     use the initial value sampled for length only as a hint. So if, for example, this integer underflow
     happens when defining the array frame_data, we ignore the value of length and choose some
     small positive integer to use as the length of the array. This behavior can be enabled in the binary
     template with a call to the function ChangeArrayLength().
        Now, since the chosen value of length is used only as a hint, the generated data may end up
     being larger or smaller than expected. This needs to be corrected. Otherwise the chunk will have a
     different length than what is specified in the length variable, leading to all following chunks being
     interpreted incorrectly. Therefore, after generating the data inside a chunk, we check if the length
     is correct. In case of a discrepancy, we go back and overwrite the value of length with the correct
     value, as shown in Lines 13 to 20 of Listing 5. There, the FSeek() function is used to jump to a
     different position in the file. Note that we temporarily disable evil decisions when fixing the value
     of length, because any wrong value would completely change the file parse tree. Such common
  FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats                                             111:9


 1 typedef struct {
 2     uint32 length <min=1, max=16>;
 3     local int64 start = FTell();
 4     char type[4];
 5     if (type == "IHDR")
 6         PNG_CHUNK_IHDR ihdr;
 7     else if (type == "PLTE")
 8         PNG_CHUNK_PLTE plte(length);
 9     /* ... */
10     else if (length > 0 && type != "IEND")
11         ubyte data[length];
12     local int64 end = FTell();
13     local uint32 correct = end - start - 4;
14     if (length != correct) { /* Fix it */
15         FSeek(start - 4);
16         local int evil = SetEvilBit(false);
17         uint32 length = { correct };
18         SetEvilBit(evil);
19         FSeek(end);
20     }
21     local uint32 crc_calc = Checksum(CHECKSUM_CRC32, start, end-start);
22     uint32 crc = { crc_calc };
23     if (crc != crc_calc)
24         Warning("Bad CRC %
25 } PNG_CHUNK;
   Listing 5. Definition of a PNG chunk, where we can see the changes to correct the chunk length and crc.


1 local uint32 seq_num = 0;
2 struct PNG_CHUNK_FDAT {
3     uint32 sequence_number = { seq_num++ };
4     ubyte frame_data[length-4];
5 };
                              Listing 6. Sequence numbers require a global counter.


  size fixes can also be simplified by the use of a macro FIX_VARIABLE(), so that this whole block of
  code can be replaced by a call to the macro.
  //•arguments:•type•,••name•,••correct•value•,•position
  FIX_VARIABLE(uint32,•length,•end•-•start•-•4,•start•-•4);


  3.3 Complex Constraints
  Next we discuss how to satisfy some more complex constraints between variables in the template.
  Relationship between variables. One common pattern happens when the value of one variable
         x restricts the possible values for another variable y. If x is generated first, then we can
         simply use the value of x in control-flow decisions or initialization lists that will define
         how y is generated. For example, a PNG chunk of type "IEND" must have length 0. This
         can be ensured by using the value of type in a control-flow decision in Line 10 of Listing 5
         to ensure no data will be generated if type is "IEND".
111:10                                                   Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller


      In case x will only be generated after y, we can still look first at the value of x using
      a lookahead function. Listing 3 shows the implementation of the IHDR chunk, where
      the possible values for the bits variable are restricted by the value of the next variable
      color_type. By using the lookahead function ReadByte() in Line 9, we can first look at
      the value at position FTell()+1, one byte after the current position. This will be the value
      of color_type, and can be used in a switch to determine the possible values for bits.
      In generation mode, ReadByte() will use the array colors provided as an argument to
      choose which value should be generated at position FTell()+1 in the file. Once a value is
      chosen by the lookahead function, it is fixed and cannot be overwritten. Therefore, when
      color_type is declared later in Line 21, it is guaranteed to have the same value that was
      previously chosen by ReadByte().
Checksums. Checksums are a common context-sensitive feature of binary formats. Luckily, the
      binary template language already provides a helper function Checksum() which implements
      common checksum algorithms. Therefore, checksums can be handled simply by computing
      the correct checksum value and specifying it as the desired value for the checksum variable,
      as shown in Line 22 of Listing 5.
Global state. Some features, such as sequence numbers which are incremented every time, require
      some global state to be generated correctly. This can be handled by defining a local variable
      of global scope, as in Listing 6.

3.4      Chunk Ordering
A big challenge in generating valid files is choosing a valid sequence of chunk types. The set of
possible types for the next chunk is usually context-sensitive, depending on which chunks have
already been generated. In PNG, for instance, the chunks IHDR, IDAT and IEND are mandatory.
The first chunk must be IHDR and the last chunk must be IEND. Some optional chunks, such as
tIME, can appear before or after IDAT. Other optional chunks, such as bKGD, can only appear
before IDAT.
   If we are only interested in parsing (not generating) PNG files, the following implementation
suffices to parse a sequence of chunks.
while (!FEof())
    PNG_CHUNK chunk;

However, to generate a valid sequence of PNG chunks, we need a way to specify the set of possible
choices and allow those choices to change for each new generated chunk.
   To solve this problem, we have extended the lookahead function ReadBytes() with 3 new
arguments: an array of preferred values, an array of possible values and a probability to pick from
the preferred values. We have also added new operators -= and += which can add or remove values
from such arrays. Listing 7 shows a binary template that can generate a sequence of PNG chunks
satisfying the ordering constraints. Here, function ReadBytes() in Line 5 needs to choose the
4-byte value which will be written to position FTell()+4 in the file, which is the location of the
type array on the next chunk. The chosen value is also returned in the chunk_type variable, which
is passed by reference to the function.
   The preferred array is used to specify what is the next mandatory chunk, while the possible
array includes all chunks which could be inserted in the next position. With a probability of 0.25,
ReadBytes() will try to pick a value from preferred, to ensure that it makes progress towards
finishing the generation and does not spend too much time creating lots of optional chunks. With
the complementary probability of 1 − 0.25, ReadBytes() will pick a value from the possible array
(or even a completely random value if an evil decision is made). If the preferred array is empty,
     FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats                                           111:11


 1    ChangeArrayLength();
 2    local char chunk_type[4];
 3    local string preferred[] = { "IHDR" };
 4    local string possible[] = { "IHDR" };
 5    while (ReadBytes(chunk_type, FTell() + 4, 4, preferred, possible, 0.25)) {
 6       PNG_CHUNK chunk;
 7       switch (chunk_type) {
 8       case "IHDR":
 9           switch (chunk.ihdr.color_type) {
10           case GrayScale:
11               local string preferred[] = { "IDAT" };
12               local string possible[] = { "tIME", "tEXt", "pHYs", /*...*/ "bKGD", "IDAT" };
13               break;
14           /* ... */
15           }
16           break;
17       case "IDAT":
18           local string preferred[] = { "IEND" };
19           possible -= ("IDAT", "pHYs", /*...*/ "bKGD");
20           possible += "IEND";
21           break;
22       /* ... */
23       case "IEND":
24           local string preferred[0];
25           local string possible[0];
26           break;
27       }
28    }
                                Listing 7. Use of ReadBytes() to define chunk ordering.




     ReadBytes() can choose a value from possible, but it is also allowed to not choose any value,
     not write any value to the file and return false, leaving the while loop. This signals that the file is
     now complete and no more chunks will be added.
        With no evil decisions, a valid chunk order is guaranteed. The first chunk must be IHDR as
     the only option specified in Lines 3 and 4. If an IHDR is generated with color_type equal to
     GrayScale, the next preferred chunk will be IDAT (Line 11), with several possible chunks available
     (Line 12), including tIME and bKGD. After IDAT is generated, IEND will be the next preferred
     chunk (Line 18) and the possible array is updated with operators -= and += in Lines 19 and 20 to
     remove and add new values. For instance, bKGD is removed because a bKGD chunk is not allowed
     after IDAT. Finally, when an IEND is generated, both arrays become empty (Lines 24 and 25) to
     signal that ReadBytes() must return false.
        Our implementation of ReadBytes() allows the same while loop from Listing 7 to work for
     both parsing and generation. In parsing mode, we can easily check whether the bytes read from the
     file belong to the preferred array, the possible array or to neither (for example, if the position
     of those bytes would be beyond the end of the file). This allows us to successfully reconstruct
     the random decisions that would need to be made to generate such a file. Our approach of using
     ReadBytes() to define chunk ordering turned out to be extremely general, being used in five of
     the developed formats (PNG, JPEG, MP4, ZIP, AVI).
111:12                                                    Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller


3.5      Compressed and Encoded Data
With all the changes shown so far, our modified binary template is able to generate almost all
chunks of a PNG file correctly. Only the IDAT chunk is still a challenge, because it contains a
zlib-compressed datastream of the image pixel data. In order to handle compressed (or otherwise
encoded) data, the compression and decompression functions should be specified such that the
generator can generate the uncompressed data first and then apply the compression function
to it to obtain the datastream that will be written to the file. We have manually implemented
this strategy for the PNG IDAT chunk by calling the appropriate functions from the zlib library,
allowing FormatFuzzer to generate fully valid PNGs. PNG was the only format so far to require
this special handling for compression, because interestingly we found that in other formats simply
generating random bytes for the compressed datastreams was sufficient to obtain streams that
could be successfully decompressed with high probability.

4     IMPLEMENTATION
In the domain of language-specific fuzzers, FormatFuzzer is a generator compiler, bringing to-
gether the versatility of language specifications and the efficiency of compiled generator code.
FormatFuzzer compiles a binary template to C++ code for generating and parsing inputs in the
format specified by the template, leveraging existing libraries for parsing [13] and processing [12]
binary templates. The generated C++ code for a given format can be compiled into a standalone
executable or a shared library that can be loaded by other fuzzers, such as AFL++ [19]. Each struct
definition in the binary template is implemented as a C++ class. We also create C++ classes to
handle native types, such as uint32 and arrays. Every time a variable is declared in the template,
this triggers a call to the generate() method of the corresponding class. FormatFuzzer supports
all important features of binary templates, including indexing into previous instances of a given
variable, and recursive structs, where one struct can contain another struct of the same type.
We support integer variables in big endian and little endian modes, as well as bitfield variables,
which can occupy only fractions of a byte.
   Our implementation allows setting a maximum size in bytes for the generated file. This is
important for fuzzing because smaller files are both faster to produce and to process with the target
program. In our experiments, we have set the maximum file size to 64 kB, since we found that
even with only a few kilobytes the files can already exhibit the whole variety of chunk types and
structures inside them. During generation, any attempt to generate too much data, such as defining
an array with a huge length, will throw an exception, aborting the generation. Generation is also
aborted if the generator attempts to consume more bytes than available in the decision seed or
performs some invalid operation, such as accessing a non-existing field from a struct (this can
happen for some formats, since control-flow decisions can determine which fields are generated
inside a struct).
   We have also integrated into FormatFuzzer quality assurance tests to verify the correct behav-
ior of our generators and parsers. We use round-trip tests to make sure that whenever a file is
successfully generated, then it can also be correctly parsed, and vice versa. We also ensure that our
fuzzers can correctly parse a corpus of real files from each format, which were manually collected
from GitHub.

5     DECISION SEEDS
The methodology followed by FormatFuzzer is the following: To generate a file, we first provide an
array of random bytes, called the decision seed. This array is the source of randomness for generator
decisions. Such decision seeds can also be reconstructed by FormatFuzzer while parsing.
FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats                                             111:13




Fig. 3. Decision seed and the corresponding generated content for PNG_CHUNK_IHDR (defined in Listing 3).


5.1   Using Decision Seeds for Generation
Every time the generator needs to make a random decision, such as which value should be used for
a variable or lookahead function, it will read the required number of bytes from the decision seed.
For example, Figure 3 shows one possible decision seed and the resulting contents of the generated
file for a PNG_CHUNK_IHDR (defined in Listing 3). For each of the seven generated variables in this
chunk, one decision byte is used to choose whether to make an evil decision. If byte 𝑏 0 is read, an
evil decision will be taken if 𝑏 0 mod 128 = 127, which happens with probability 1/128. In the most
common case, no evil decision is made. For variables width and height, which were declared with
<min=1, max=24>, this means that the next byte 𝑏 1 will be used to compute 𝑏 1 mod 24 in order to
choose uniformly from one of the 24 possible values.
   For the bits and color_type variables, the ReadByte() call in Line 9 of Listing 3 tells us to first
skip the bits variable and pick a suitable value for color_type from the array colors, which are
the valid values for a PNG_COLOR_SPACE_TYPE. In order to do that, we first consume one decision
byte that will be used as a temporary padding for the byte we skipped in the file when jumping to
FTell()+1. Then, the next two decision bytes are used to pick the value at position FTell()+1
(which will be color_type): one to decide whether to make an evil decision and one to pick an
appropriate value from the five possible choices in the array colors. If we pick the second value in
the array, which is TrueColor with value 2, then Line 14 of Listing 3 tells us that there are two
possible values to pick for the bits variable: 8 or 16. Finally, when we reach Line 21, which defines
the color_type variable, we do not need to consume any more decision bytes, because its value
had already been chosen at the previous call to ReadByte().
   Given a decision seed, the generation process is completely deterministic. The decision seed
encodes the essential features of a given file in a representation which is tailored for fuzzing by
exhaustively exploring the file structure. The correspondence between the decision seeds and the
generated files can be thought of as a partial function 𝑓 : Seeds ↛ Files. For some values of the
seed, the generation can fail. For example, say we have taken an evil decision such as an invalid
color_type in the PNG IHDR chunk. This makes it impossible to later generate the data for another
chunk. But if the generation succeeds, it associates the seed 𝑠 to a unique well-defined file 𝑓 (𝑠). The
resulting file 𝑓 (𝑠) is not guaranteed to conform to the format specification (for instance, due to evil
decisions), but it should be valid with high probability. This mapping 𝑓 is not injective, but ideally
every valid file should be obtainable by the generator, i.e. Valid ⊆ 𝑓 (Seeds). This completeness
111:14                                                       Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller


property can be experimentally checked by attempting to parse valid files – say, downloaded from
the Internet – with FormatFuzzer. As discussed in the next section, whenever parsing succeeds,
we also obtain a decision seed for the parsed file, which in turn means that this file can be the
output of the FormatFuzzer generator by taking the appropriate decisions.

5.2      Creating Decision Seeds During Parsing
When FormatFuzzer runs in parsing mode, we obtain not only the parse tree for the input file,
but also a decision seed that can be used to generate the same input file, as presented in the diagram
of Figure 2. This is done by reconstructing at each step the decision bytes that would be required to
produce the target file contents. For example, in Figure 3, the decision bytes on the left are exactly
the ones that would be obtained by parsing the file contents on the right. For each variable, we
find out if an evil decision is required by checking whether its value is one of the possible values
specified. In the most common case, no evil decision is required and we can reconstruct the next
decision byte as the index of the value that should be picked from the array of possible values. This
reconstructed decision seed is not unique. For example, there are 24 valid values for the variables
width and height, so any decision byte which is in the same congruence class modulo 24 would
result in the same value.
   One important axiom of our framework is that a file can be successfully parsed by FormatFuzzer
if and only if the file can be generated from some appropriate decision seed. And the generator
and parser must always agree on the same parse tree for the file. That is why we cannot allow evil
decisions when fixing the length field in Line 17 of Listing 5. If the generator were to overwrite
length with an evil value, the generator and the parser would disagree about the starting position
of the next chunk. Generally, the variables which define sizes or positions in the file, as discussed
in Section 3.2, are the only ones which must be generated strictly without evil decisions. Our
round-trip tests have shown that generated files can be correctly parsed (and vice versa) even when
all other variables are allowed to have evil values.

6 FUZZING STRATEGIES
The FormatFuzzer generators and parsers can be used for numerous fuzzing strategies. We discuss
a few in this section.

6.1      Generating Random Files
The simplest approach to fuzzing with FormatFuzzer is to use completely random seeds (say, from
/dev/urandom) to generate files in a black-box manner. A good fraction of the generated files will
be valid according to the format specification and the files will come from a semantically diverse
distribution in terms of covered features. For example, as discussed in Listing 3, all possible values
for color_type will be chosen with equal probability, as will the possible values of bits for a
given color_type.

6.2      Mutating Inputs
Another fuzzing strategy enabled by FormatFuzzer is the use of smart mutations, where chunks
can be abstracted, replaced, deleted or inserted into a file, as seen in Figure 4. Here, we use ‘chunk’
generically to refer to any struct or variable defined in the binary template. We define novel smart
mutation operations which work over decision seeds, thus allowing contextual information to be
taken into account when producing the mutated file.
6.2.1 Smart Abstraction. The first operator we discuss is smart abstraction, which allows abstracting
one specific chunk 𝑐 1 into a new random version 𝑐 2 . This operation works by first parsing the original
FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats                                               111:15




        Fig. 4. Smart mutations in FormatFuzzer. Here, X indicates the use of lookahead functions.




file and obtaining its decision seed. Then, we generate a new file by repeating all the decisions
that were made before the target chunk 𝑐 1 and then using random bytes from /dev/urandom to
produce the target chunk. Once we detect that the target chunk has been generated, we go back to
using the same decision bytes that were used after chunk 𝑐 1 in the original file. We have found
that smart abstractions were the most useful in reaching new coverage, and they are only possible
because of our FormatFuzzer framework, which enables synchronized generation and parsing.

6.2.2 Smart Replacement. The next operator smart replacement, which replaces a chunk 𝑐 1 from
file1 with a different chunk 𝑐 2 of the same type from file2 . Again, we first parse both files to obtain
the decision seeds seed 1 and seed 2 . Then, a new mutated seed is created by replacing the decision
bytes which created chunk 𝑐 1 with the decision bytes that create chunk 𝑐 2 , leaving the remaining
parts of the seed unchanged, as depicted in the smart replace operation of Figure 4. This mutated
seed is then used by the generator to produce the mutated file.
   To see why performing these operations on the decision seeds can help to generate valid files,
consider the case where 𝑐 1 is some internal field of a PNG chunk. If 𝑐 1 is replaced by a new instance 𝑐 2
of the same type, but a different value and different size, then the generator will still compute the
correct checksum and size for the modified chunk, while a simple copying of the contents of 𝑐 2
into 𝑐 1 would leave the checksum and size invalid. This is especially important for successful smart
mutations of formats such as MP4, which consist of structs called boxes which recursively contain
other boxes.

6.2.3 Smart Deletions. Our smart delete operation consists of deleting a chunk from a file, by
removing the decision bytes which were responsible for the generation of this chunk. Such a
deletion operation only makes sense if we identify that the target chunk 𝑐 is optional. We define a
chunk 𝑐 to be optional when, right before this chunk is generated, the template calls a lookahead
function. This signals that, depending on the result of this lookahead call, we might decide not
to generate 𝑐 at all. For example, the variable chunk declared in Line 6 of Listing 7 is considered
optional, because its declaration comes after a call to ReadBytes(). We allow smart deletion to be
performed over a chunk 𝑐 only when a lookahead function has been called right before and right
after the generation of 𝑐, as shown in Figure 4. This way, with the new mutated seed, the call to the
lookahead function will consume the bytes that were originally consumed at the lookahead call
that came after chunk 𝑐.
111:16                                                    Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller


6.2.4 Smart Insertions. Conversely, we define a smart insert as the inverse of the smart delete
operation, trying to insert a new chunk 𝑐 into a file. Here, the original file must have a call to a
lookahead function at the insertion position, so that the result of this call could be used to decide
whether chunk 𝑐 should be created. The inserted chunk 𝑐 must also be optional. When performing
smart insertions and replacements, FormatFuzzer also checks whether the correct number of
decision bytes has been consumed in the generation of the new chunk. In case the mutations do
not work well because the new chunk does not fit in the desired position, this can be identified
and reported by FormatFuzzer. For example, attempting to copy a bKGD chunk (which specifies a
background color) will not work if one file uses color type TrueColor, which requires three values,
while the other uses GrayScale, which requires only one.
6.2.5 Cross-File Operations. FormatFuzzer implements procedures to parse a list of files and
remember all the information about the chunks so they can be used later for smart mutations.
There is also a procedure to apply one smart mutation to a chosen file. Here, we randomly choose
which kind of mutation will be applied and which chunks will be involved.

6.3      Integrating with Format-Agnostic Fuzzers
Besides generation and mutation, FormatFuzzer can also integrate with existing format-agnostic
fuzzers such as AFL [58] in different ways. For our experiments, we have integrated FormatFuzzer
with AFL++ [19] version 2.60c as follows.
AFL+FFGen uses AFL to mutate and evolve the decision seeds, which will be later fed into the
     FormatFuzzer generator to produce inputs for the target program. AFL can use the coverage
     feedback from the program to learn how to effectively mutate the decision seeds. The
     advantage of working on such seeds is that they are simpler than binary files, since each
     byte corresponds to a unique decision, and those decisions are made sequentially in the
     order in which they appear in the seed. Since the FormatFuzzer generator already takes
     care of the correct input structure, such as computing the correct checksums, inserting the
     appropriate magic values and setting the correct size fields, AFL can focus exclusively on
     the high-level decisions that represent the file.
AFL+FFMut lets AFL mutate the files that will be given to the target program as usual, but also
     adds new mutation operations which are the smart mutations provided by FormatFuzzer.
     Every interesting input, which achieves new coverage, is saved in the AFL queue. When such
     an input is about to be mutated for fuzzing, we also parse this input with FormatFuzzer,
     allowing it be used for smart mutations.

7     EVALUATION
Our evaluation focuses on the following research questions:
RQ1      How much effort is it to set up a binary template file for input generation?
RQ2      How efficient is FormatFuzzer in producing inputs?
RQ3      How accurate is FormatFuzzer in producing inputs?
RQ4      How accurate are the smart mutations applied by FormatFuzzer?
RQ5      How efficient is FormatFuzzer as a standalone black-box fuzzer?
RQ6      How efficient is the integration of FormatFuzzer with a format-agnostic fuzzer?
RQ7      How does FormatFuzzer compare against other format-aware fuzzers?
RQ8      Does FormatFuzzer find real bugs?
  To answer these questions, we ran a series of experiments. All our experiments were conducted
on an Intel Xeon CPU E5-4650L machine with 64 cores and 756 GB RAM, running Debian 10. The
FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats                                           111:17


                          Table 1. Number of lines of code required for each format.

                  Format     Original    Modified Template     Changes     Generated C++
                  GIF             204                  234    +38 −8                2,144
                  BMP             138                  249   +130 −19               1,267
                  PCAP            220                  268    +72 −24               1,388
                  MIDI            261                  282    +39 −18               1,771
                  AVI             304                  471   +248 −81               2,645
                  PNG             388                  492   +114 −10        2,664 (+170)
                  WAV             574                  649   +108 −33               2,457
                  ZIP             669                  774   +191 −86               2,608
                  MP4             807                1,420   +771 −158              4,556
                  JPG           1,631                1,662   +282 −251              5,683



fuzzers were run on a single processor for 24 hours. We have repeated each experiment for a total
of 10 runs.
   In our evaluation, we compare FormatFuzzer against the format-agnostic fuzzer AFL++ [19], as
well as the state-of-the-art fuzzer of binary file formats AFLSmart [39]. We do not compare against
the grammar-based fuzzers Superion [53], Nautilus [3] and Grimoire [5] because such fuzzers
were only evaluated on text-based grammar input formats, such as markup languages (XML) or
programming languages (JavaScript, PHP, Ruby, Lua, C, nasm, SQL, SMT). These textual formats do
not have common features of binary formats, such as size fields, checksums, or bitfields. Therefore,
it is not clear how well such fuzzers could handle those features. For Superion and Nautilus, a
complete format specification would have to be written from scratch for each new binary format.
On the other hand, Grimoire can mine format specifications, but it only supports textual languages,
as it splits its inputs based on particular characters, such as opening and closing brackets and
quotation marks. The Grimoire paper points out, for instance, that the tool can apply effective
mutations to Lua source code, but not to Lua bytecode.
   For evaluations, we have chosen 10 popular binary file formats, including the most popular
formats for compressed archives (ZIP), images (PNG, JPG) and videos (MP4), as well as additional
formats which are supported by AFLSmart.

7.1   RQ1: Effort for Extending Template Files
We start with RQ1: How much effort is it to set up a binary template file for input generation? To
answer this question, Table 1 lists the number of lines of code required for each format specification.
We list the sizes of the original binary template and modified version, which supports generation.
We also detail the number of lines which were added or removed. For most formats the number of
changes is small compared to the amount of code we can already leverage from existing parsing-only
binary templates.
   All of the formats shown in Table 1, with the exception of PNG, were developed by three different
BSc students, who did not have prior experience with binary formats. Once they had learned the
binary template language while creating the first format, development was easier, since many
patterns are common to multiple formats. From their experience, a couple of days is sufficient for
updating most formats for generation. However, a few complex formats took more than one week
to modify. That was the case with MP4, which is composed of several different chunk types, many
of which were not fully described in the original binary template. Note, though, that this effort can
hardly be avoided: A random fuzzer will only very occasionally generate a valid MP4 file, let alone
111:18                                                                      Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller


                     Table 2. Average performance of the fuzzers in terms of speed and validity.

               Speed (files / 𝑠)    Size      With Evil     Without Evil      AFL
   Fmt.         Gen. Parsed          (𝐵)     Suc. Valid      Suc. Valid      Valid    Validation Command
   PNG          6,229     2,488      752     97%    84%     100%    92%        5%     identify -verbose - | grep Elapsed
   JPG          7,457     5,059    1,343    100%    81%     100%    95%       66%     identify -verbose - | grep Elapsed
   GIF          6,111     3,760    6,007    100%    40%     100%    40%       14%     identify -verbose - | grep Elapsed
   MIDI         3,453 21,639         573     96%    74%     100%    74%       60%     ! timidity - -Ol | grep ∧-:
   MP4          3,786     2,465    2,093     99%    82%     100%    88%       34%     ffmpeg -y -i - -c:v mpeg4 -c:a copy o.mp4
   ZIP         10,229 13,844       1,894     96%    72%      98%    75%        2%     yes | unzip -P "" -t ⟨ input file ⟩ 1
   PCAP         6,736     5,299    2,190     95%    91%     100% 100%          3%     tcpdump -nr -
   AVI         18,489 25,560         415     95%    84%     100%    90%       27%     ffmpeg -y -f avi -i - output.avi
   WAV          7,279     7,988    4,014     95%    96%      98%    99%       26%     wavpack -y - -o output.wav
   BMP          4,377     6,225    1,173     95%    80%      95%    83%       23%     identify -verbose - | grep Elapsed



systematically cover all chunk types; and a hand-coded MP4 generator will require the same or
higher specification effort (and neither result in a parser nor a mutator).
    Table 1 also lists the number of lines of format-specific C++ code which were automatically
generated by FormatFuzzer. We have found that the use of a domain-specific language of binary
templates makes our specifications much more succinct and readable than if they were developed
from scratch in a general-purpose language such as C++. Only for the PNG format did we have
to edit the C++ code directly to support data compression; in the future, we plan to add native
support for compression in FormatFuzzer, making such manual changes unnecessary.
    To give some perpective, the first author of this paper had written a PNG generator completely
from scratch in C++, before seeing the PNG binary template [45], by reading the PNG specifica-
tion [14], a document which spans 50 pages. This manually written implementation had 596 lines
of C++ code, which is a lot higher than the number of lines of code that had to be modified by
starting from an existing PNG binary template and leveraging the FormatFuzzer framework—and
it is a generator only, without any parsing or mutation capabilities, let alone coverage guidance.
Takeaway 1. Extending binary templates is less work than writing a generator from scratch, and
provides a parser and mutator on top.

7.2       RQ2: Generator Speed
For RQ2 (How efficient is FormatFuzzer in producing inputs?), we measure the speed of our
generators and parsers and classify the validity of the generated files by feeding them to a target
program. The question of how to define the validity of files can be somewhat tricky. Different
programs that process a given format tend not to agree about which inputs they accept, and they
often do not follow the official specification. Programs such as media players tend to be forgiving
and continue processing the input even after identifying some data corruption. In line with our
main goal of reaching deeper code in the application, we classify a file as invalid only when it
triggers a critical error which prevents further processing of the file. For example, for images we
used the command identify -verbose from ImageMagick and checked the output to see if the
program could successfully print detailed information about the image, even if some errors were
reported.
   Table 2 summarizes our results. For each format-aware fuzzer, we have generated 10,000 files,
then also parsed those files and tested them with a target program to check for validity (validation
command). Here, we see that FormatFuzzer can both generate and parse inputs at a speed of
1 For   unzip, both exit status 0 (normal) and exit status 1 (just warnings, but no errors) are considered valid files.
FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats                                           111:19


thousands per second for all the tested file formats. This is comparable or sometimes even faster
than the speed with which format-agnostic fuzzers, such as AFL, can execute inputs. Therefore,
our generators and parsers can be easily integrated into existing fuzzers without becoming a
performance bottleneck.
Takeaway 2. FormatFuzzer is very fast, generating and parsing thousands of inputs per second.

7.3   RQ3: Input Validity
Table 2 also shows which fraction of the generations produced an output (successfully completed
generation) and which fraction of those outputs was classified as valid, addressing RQ3: How
accurate is FormatFuzzer in producing inputs? The results show that our fuzzers succeed almost
all the time in producing inputs and those inputs have a high chance of being accepted by the
target program. The validity is even higher if evil decisions are disabled. However, evil decisions
are particularly useful in fuzzing to trigger some unexpected behaviors.
Takeaway 3. The large majority of files generated by FormatFuzzer is valid.
  To put this validity into perspective, let us compare against inputs produced by the format-
agnostic AFL fuzzer, listed under the “AFL” column. We see that even with sample files, AFL
produces far fewer valid input files. In fact, if we compute the ratio of valid files produced by
FormatFuzzer and valid files produced by AFL, we obtain geometric average of 4.9 (minimum 1.2,
maximum 36.0).
Takeaway 4. FormatFuzzer produces on average five times more valid inputs than a format-agnostic
fuzzer.
  In the next section, we also compare the validity of inputs produced by FormatFuzzer against
inputs produced by AFLSmart.

7.4   RQ4: Mutation Validity
For RQ4 (How accurate are the smart mutations applied by FormatFuzzer?), we evaluate how
successful our smart mutations are compared to simpler mutations which do not use decision seeds.
From our four smart mutations defined in Section 6.2, three of them (replace, insert, delete) could
be implemented in a simple way by applying the corresponding operation (replace, insert, delete)
directly to the chunks of the files, without using decision seeds. Such implementation is common
in prior work, such as in AFLSmart [39].
   In order to evaluate our smart mutations, we have applied each type of mutation 10,000 times
over the initial corpus of valid files for each format. Table 3 show our results, where the numbers
are expressed as percentages. For each smart mutation, we first show the success rate (which
percentage of tries successfully generated a file). For the replace and insert mutations, we also show
in parenthesis the percentage of tries for which we consumed exactly the expected number of
decision bytes while generating the target chunk. In those cases, we should expect the resulting
file to be the semantically correct result of applying the desired mutation. But even when this does
not happen (for example, if the chunk to be inserted cannot fit in the target position), in the great
majority of cases we still manage to produce a file, which is helpful for fuzzing. In fact, the success
rate in generating a file is almost always above 91%.
   From those cases where a file is successfully generated, we report which percentage of those files
are considered valid, and also which percentage would be valid if we applied the simple version of
the corresponding mutation. As shown in Table 3, we obtain almost universally higher validity
when applying our smart mutations over decision seeds, when compared to their simple versions.
111:20                                                                     Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller


Table 3. Smart mutations: success (Suc.), semantic correctness of the target chunk (Cor.), validity (Val.),
validity of the corresponding simple mutation (Sim.), and fraction of cases where our smart mutations differ
from the simple versions (Diff.). All numbers are expressed as percentages (%).

                          Replace                             Insert                          Delete               Abstract
 Fmt.       Suc. (Cor.)    Val. Sim.    Diff.   Suc. (Cor.)   Val. Sim.      Diff.   Suc.   Val. Sim.     Diff.   Suc. Val.
 PNG           98 (36)      84     7      98       95 (12)      60    19       97      96    75      37     73     100    90
 JPG          100 (58)      84    68      70      100 (38)      45    79       87     100    86      86     50     100    83
 GIF          100 (61)      39    29      51      100 (60)      24    20       49     100     6       6      9     100    41
 MIDI         100 (91)      99    92      45      100 (98)     100    99      100    –/–2   –/–    –/–     –/–     100    98
 MP4           94 (39)      67    43      77       86 (16)      24    19       98      77    30      28     99      96    71
 ZIP           99 (54)      77    27      81       96 (41)      71    29      100      99    77       0    100      99    83
 PCAP          99 (86)     100    88      24     100 (100)     100   100        0     100   100    100       0      98    99
 AVI           91 (53)      78    75      80       92 (37)      77    86      100      91    89      84    100      94    86
 WAV           97 (45)      74    42      85       92 (27)      75    33       99      95    61      31     97      97    78
 BMP           97 (58)      95    61      84          –/–3     –/–   –/–      –/–     –/–   –/–    –/–     –/–      99    93


This is expected, as our smart mutations are able to take contextual information into account,
for example, being able to recompute the correct checksum for a chunk, even when the contents
of the chunk have been partially modified. We also report on which percentage of the cases the
files resulting from our smart mutations are different from what would be obtained by applying a
simple mutation. Finally, we would also like to point out that our smart abstract mutations are only
possible due to FormatFuzzer’s ability to generate new chunks completely from scratch, and those
abstractions produce very high validity, being the most profitable type of mutation in reaching
new coverage during fuzzing.
Takeaway 5. Smart mutations applied over decision seeds, as performed by FormatFuzzer, are far
more likely to yield valid inputs than smart mutations which simply copy the contents of chunks from
the files, as the ones used by prior work, such as AFLSmart.

7.5      RQ5: Black-Box Fuzzing
Let us now evaluate the effectiveness of FormatFuzzer, notably in achieving coverage in our test
subjects. Generally speaking, the higher the coverage of a test generator, the higher its chance to
detect bugs—in particular, since if code is not covered, bugs will not be detected.
   We start with RQ5: How efficient is FormatFuzzer as a standalone black-box fuzzer? We evaluate
two black-box settings:
FFGen is using FormatFuzzer as a standalone input generator, requiring no knowledge or feed-
         back from the program under test. (Note that this is a setting in which only a specification-
         based fuzzer like FormatFuzzer can succeed.)
FFMut is using FormatFuzzer to parse one initial set of input files and apply smart mutations,
         again without guidance.
   First, we evaluate the language coverage, i.e., which features of the binary template are actually
present in the generated files. In order to do this, we have generated 10,000 files with the black-box
generation strategy FFGen and measured which percentage of variable declaration statements in
the binary template have been covered, since variable declarations are the places where a new node
is added to the parse tree. Table 5 shows the resulting language coverage, which is at least 94%
for almost all formats. Only the JPG format had a lower coverage of 79%. The missing coverage
was mostly due to some optional chunks which were enabled for parsing, but had not yet been
2 The   MIDI format does not have any deletable chunks.
3 The   BMP format does not have any optional chunks, so insertions and deletions are not possible.
FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats                                                             111:21


                                             Table 4. Programs under test.

          Format     Program                               Invocation
          PNG        libpng 1.6.37-3                       readpng
          JPG        libjpeg-turbo 1_2.0.6-4               djpeg ⟨input file⟩
          GIF        gif2png 2.5.14                        gif2png ⟨input file⟩
          MIDI       TiMidity++ 2.14.0-8                   timidity - -o - -Ow
          MP4        FFmpeg 4.4                            ffmpeg -y -i - out.mp4
          ZIP        UnZip 6.0-26                          unzip -P "" -t ⟨input file⟩
          PCAP       tcpdump 4.99.0-2,                     tcpdump -nr -
                     libpcap 1.10.0-2
          AVI        FFmpeg 4.4                            ffmpeg -y -i - out.avi
          WAV        WavPack 5.4.0-1                       wavpack -y - -o -
          BMP        libgdk-pixbuf 2.42.6-1                gdk-pixbuf-thumbnailer ⟨input file⟩ out.png

         Table 5. Language Coverage: coverage of variable declarations (%) in the binary template.

                Setting   PNG      JPG      GIF     MIDI     MP4     ZIP    PCAP     AVI    WAV     BMP
                FFGen      100       79     100      100      94      94      100     98      97      98


modified to generate valid contents. We generate such chunks only with very low probability, in
order to ensure most generations will produce valid files.
Takeaway 6. By itself, FormatFuzzer extensively covers the language features present in valid
inputs.
   Next, we evaluate how well the fuzzer performs on real-world applications. Table 4 lists the
programs with the exact command used for fuzzing. The fuzzing experiments used a timeout of 24
hours. For all techniques which require an initial corpus of inputs, we have used the same corpus
of files, which were small files from each format manually downloaded from GitHub. Each corpus
had an average of 11 files (minimum 5, maximum 31).

Table 6. Line coverage (%) of FormatFuzzer in black-box settings. Here, 𝐴 \ 𝐵 represents the lines which were
covered by technique 𝐴, but not 𝐵.

          Setting              PNG        JPG     GIF    MIDI      MP4     ZIP    PCAP     AVI    WAV      BMP
          FFGen                 23.0      24.6    68.9    12.4      5.7    34.8    12.5     5.8    21.8     27.8
          FFMut                 24.7      24.4    70.5    10.4      7.4    36.1     9.8     7.1    21.9     27.8
          FFGen \ FFMut          0.2       0.2     0.5     2.1      0.5     0.2     4.2     0.8     0.1      0.1
          FFMut \ FFGen          1.9       0.1     2.2     0.1      2.2     1.5     1.5     2.0     0.2      0.0


  Table 6 lists the resulting line coverage obtained with LCOV (average over all runs) for the black-
box settings. One interesting aspect is that in both settings, all inputs are generated syntactically
valid by construction; and indeed, inspection shows that error-handling code is hardly covered.4
Takeaway 7. FormatFuzzer achieves decent coverage even in black-box settings, without any guid-
ance from the program under test.
4 Generallyspeaking, reaching error-handling code is the easy part of fuzzing; if one wants to cover error-handling code,
too, one could easily introduce subtle lexical mutations into the files generated by FormatFuzzer.
111:22                                                          Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller


  The lower half of Table 6 highlights the coverage difference between the two settings; here, 𝐴 \ 𝐵
denotes lines covered in 𝐴, but not in 𝐵. The advantage of FFGen over FFMut is prominent in
MIDI and PCAP, where the binary template covers exotic contents not found in our sample files.
Conversely, the additional coverage of FFMut over FFGen is likely due to some features in the
corpus of input files which are not described in the binary templates.
Takeaway 8. Some features in the spec are unlikely to be found in files in the wild.
   Additionally, we have noticed that for all formats, the final coverage obtained after generating
files with the FFGen approach exceeds the coverage from our downloaded corpus (by a factor of
1.4× on average).

7.6      RQ6: Integrating Format-Agnostic Fuzzers
In practice, we will frequently encounter settings where feedback from the program under test is
available, and where FormatFuzzer therefore can integrate with existing format-agnostic fuzzers.
Let us thus address RQ6: How efficient is the integration of FormatFuzzer with a format-agnostic
fuzzer? We have integrated FormatFuzzer with the popular AFL++ [19] fuzzer in two different
ways, as presented in Section 6.3:
AFL+FFGen is using AFL to mutate the decision seed which is then fed into FormatFuzzer and
     used to generate inputs for the target program. Since only the decision seed is mutated, the
     generated inputs should conform to the given format.
AFL+FFMut is having AFL use FormatFuzzer to perform smart mutations on the input file.
     FormatFuzzer parses the files which are about to be fuzzed and remembers information
     about the chunks present in those files, which it can later use to perform smart mutations.
     Note that all regular AFL mutations are also used, which can yield invalid inputs and helps
     covering error handling code. The smart mutations from FormatFuzzer are added as an
     additional custom mutator.

Table 7. Line coverage (%) of FormatFuzzer integrated with AFL. Here, 𝐴 \ 𝐵 represents the lines which were
covered by technique 𝐴, but not 𝐵. Vargha-Delaney effect size 𝐴12 (statistically significant effects in bold).

      Setting                    PNG     JPG    GIF    MIDI    MP4    ZIP    PCAP     AVI    WAV      BMP
      AFL                         20.7   29.8   73.3    13.3   11.5   36.9    25.3    11.2    22.4     30.7
      AFL+FFGen                   25.4   27.2   71.7    12.1    9.7   38.4    22.1    10.3    21.9     27.9
      AFL+FFMut                   27.8   33.6   73.3    14.3   11.4   38.6    26.2    11.8    22.3     30.7
      AFL+FFGen \ AFL              6.3    2.4    0.1     0.3    0.6    2.4      1.1    0.7     0.0      0.0
      AFL+FFMut \ AFL              7.2    3.8    0.0     1.7    0.9    2.1      2.3    1.0     0.1      0.0
      AFL \ AFL+FFGen              1.5    5.0    1.8     1.5    2.5    0.9      4.3    1.6     0.5      2.9
      AFL \ AFL+FFMut              0.0    0.0    0.1     0.7    0.9    0.4      1.5    0.5     0.3      0.0
      AFL+FFGen \ FFGen            2.5    2.8    3.3     0.2    4.1    3.6    10.0     4.4     0.3      0.0
      AFL+FFMut \ FFMut            3.2    9.2    2.9     3.9    4.1    2.6    16.5     4.5     0.4      2.9
      𝐴12 (AFL+FFMut > AFL)        1.0    1.0   0.34    0.66   0.52    1.0    0.81    0.87    0.41     0.45


   Table 7 lists the resulting coverage. In our fuzzing experiments, we have enabled AFL dictionaries
whenever suitable, for a fair comparison against the optimal setup of AFL. We have not used
dictionaries for the AFL+FFGen approach, since this fuzzer mutates decision seeds, and not binary
files directly. Dictionaries were enabled for all formats, with the exception of MIDI, for which there
was no dictionary provided by AFL++.
FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats                                                            111:23


   For most subjects, the set differences show that both strategies increase coverage over plain AFL,
showing that FormatFuzzer is effective in making format-agnostic fuzzers format aware. For six
out of ten subjects, the integration also achieves a higher coverage in absolute terms.
   Table 7 also reports the Vargha-Delaney effect size 𝐴12 , which estimates the probability that
AFL+FFMut will perform better than the competing technique AFL. Values greater than 0.5 indicate
that AFL+FFMut more likely to win this coverage comparison. Statistically significant effects are
marked in bold, according to the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. As we can see, AFL+FFMut performed
significantly better on five benchmarks, while for the remaining five there was no statistically
significant difference. On three benchmarks, AFL had a slight advantage. The reason here was
because the smart mutations from FormatFuzzer require slightly more computation time than
format-agnostic mutations, so AFL achieved more coverage simply by being able to run more
executions. But the advantage AFL had on those benchmarks is not statistically significant.
Takeaway 9. Format-aware fuzzing with FormatFuzzer reaches lines that format-agnostic fuzzing
does not.
   However, AFL by itself also covers lines that the integration of AFL and FormatFuzzer did not
reach. One reason for this is again AFL producing several invalid inputs, covering error-handling
code, which AFL+FFGen avoids by construction. The evil decisions in FormatFuzzer do enable a
limited class of invalid inputs, but such evil decisions are sparse and are not allowed to completely
destroy the structure of the input, for example, by generating inputs that fail to parse due to an
incorrect chunk size. So the random mutations performed by AFL are still needed to cover all the
parsing errors in the target program.
Takeaway 10. Format-aware and format-agnostic fuzzing complement each other.
   Comparing the AFL integration against FormatFuzzer standalone, we also see that integrating
AFL’s coverage guidance into format-aware fuzzing also significantly improves coverage over a
pure black-box setting. Hence, such integration is a preferred setting if sample inputs and coverage
feedback are available.
Takeaway 11. Integrating FormatFuzzer with coverage-guided fuzzers improves coverage over
black-box settings.

7.7     RQ7: Alternate Format-Aware Strategies
Our next evaluation concerns RQ7: How does FormatFuzzer compare against other format-aware
fuzzers? The competitor here is AFLSmart [39], which uses format information from Peach speci-
fications to determine chunk boundaries in input files, thus also resulting in smarter mutations.
AFLSmart uses input specifications to parse inputs only, but not to generate valid inputs.
Table 8. Line coverage (%) of FormatFuzzer and AFLSmart. Here, 𝐴 \ 𝐵 represents the lines which were
covered by technique 𝐴, but not 𝐵. Vargha-Delaney effect size 𝐴12 (statistically significant effects in bold).

 Setting                                  PNG        JPG     GIF   MIDI    MP4     ZIP    PCAP    AVI     WAV     BMP
 AFLSmart                                  20.7      29.7   –/–5    14.1   12.3    36.4    26.4   12.2     22.2   –/–6
 AFL+FFMut                                 27.8      33.6   73.3    14.3   11.4    38.6    26.2   11.8     22.3    30.7
 AFLSmart \ AFL+FFMut                       0.0       0.1    –/–     1.7     1.3    0.2     1.9     1.0     0.0    –/–
 AFL+FFMut \ AFLSmart                       7.1       4.0    –/–     1.9     0.5    2.4     1.7     0.6     0.1    –/–
 𝐴12 (AFL+FFMut > AFLSmart)                 1.0       1.0    –/–    0.48   0.04     1.0    0.39   0.12    0.73     –/–

5 AFLSmart  crashed with a segmentation fault.
6 BMP   format is still not supported by AFLSmart.
111:24                                                            Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller


   The coverage results are listed in Table 8. Comparing AFLSmart against AFL+FFMut, we see
that the AFL+FormatFuzzer integration outperforms AFLSmart in five out of eight subjects, while
in the other two subjects (GIF and BMP) we could not run AFLSmart. Table 8 also includes the
Vargha-Delaney effect sizes 𝐴12 and the Wilcoxon signed-rank test for statistical significance. We
see that AFL+FFMut performed significantly better in four benchmarks, while AFLSmart had a
significant advantage in two benchmarks. As we again see in the differences, even on cases where
AFLSmart performed better, AFL+FFMut has still covered some lines of code which were not
covered by AFLSmart.
   One contributing factor here is the completeness of the format specifications. One advantage
of FormatFuzzer is that we can leverage very detailed binary templates which had already been
developed for parsing. The creators of AFLSmart, on the other hand, had to write their format
specifications (Peach pits) from scratch, so they are less complete. For example, the Peach pit for
PNG only specializes the internal contents of three chunk types: IHDR, cHRM and IEND, while the
PNG binary template fully defined 15 chunk types, even before any changes.
   However, from our experience, the more detailed format specifications lead to only small improve-
ments in fuzzing if those specifications are only used for parsing, as in AFLSmart. FormatFuzzer
reaps the most benefits from those detailed specifications from its ability to also generate valid in-
puts, which is used in FFMut to apply semantically valid smart mutations which respect contextual
information.
Takeaway 12. Using input formats for parsing, mutating, and generating, as FormatFuzzer does,
yields additional coverage over using them for parsing only, as AFLSmart does.
  We have also noticed that FormatFuzzer is particularly efficient in generating high-quality
inputs and achieving high coverage very quickly during the fuzzing campaign.

Table 9. Line coverage (%) of FormatFuzzer and AFLSmart in one hour of fuzzing. Here, 𝐴 \ 𝐵 represents the
lines which were covered by technique 𝐴, but not 𝐵. Vargha-Delaney effect size 𝐴12 (statistically significant
effects in bold).

 Setting                            PNG     JPG    GIF    MIDI      MP4    ZIP     PCAP     AVI     WAV     BMP
 AFLSmart                            20.5   28.5   –/–     10.4      8.3   33.9     17.1      8.0    22.1    –/–
 AFL+FFMut                           27.3   31.4   71.9    10.4      8.5   37.2     18.1      8.2    22.2    30.0
 AFLSmart \ AFL+FFMut                 0.0    0.4   –/–      0.1      0.4    0.2       1.0     0.3     0.0    –/–
 AFL+FFMut \ AFLSmart                 6.8    3.3   –/–      0.0      0.6    3.4       2.0     0.6     0.1    –/–
 𝐴12 (AFL+FFMut > AFLSmart)           1.0    1.0   –/–     0.43     0.73    1.0     0.92    0.86    0.97     –/–

   Table 9 shows the same information as in Table 8, but only for the first hour of fuzzing (we
use again an average over 10 runs). We notice that, in the short run of one hour, FormatFuzzer
performed significantly better than AFLSmart on six out of eight benchmarks, and never performed
significantly worse.
Takeaway 13. FormatFuzzer is particularly good at finding coverage on a limited time budget.

7.8      RQ8: Bugs Found
We close our evaluation with RQ8: Does FormatFuzzer find real bugs? The answer is: Yes! In our
initial fuzzing experiments with FormatFuzzer, we have found and reported:
      • 16 distinct segmentation faults (by different stack traces) and 8 distinct aborts in ffmpeg
         (MP4 and AVI), which turned out to be at least 8 distinct bugs which have already been fixed
         to date by the FFmpeg developers. These occur when ffmpeg is compiled with pthreads
FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats                                         111:25


        (which is the default option) and the fuzzer runs with a memory limit of 200 MB (using
        AFL’s -m option). These bugs are located in a wide range of different stages through the
        execution: allocation, initialization of h264 slices, multi-threading, writing mov packets,
        video encoding, decoding spectral data and context cleanup.
      • 19 distinct memory errors (by different stack traces) in timidity (MIDI). We will update
        the paper when those bugs are fixed.

Note that ffmpeg “is part of the workflow of hundreds of other software projects, and its libraries
are a core part of software media players such as VLC, and has been included in core processing
for YouTube and iTunes.” [1]


Takeaway 14. FormatFuzzer finds bugs in relevant software.


7.9    Discussion
Leveraging input format specifications pays off. In every single setting, FormatFuzzer explored
additional coverage—and thus additional chances to find bugs and vulnerabilities. FormatFuzzer
can be used as a standalone generator, notably in black-box settings; the integration with feedback-
driven fuzzers such as AFL combines the best of format-aware and feedback-directed fuzzing.
   The evaluation also shows the versatility of FormatFuzzer. Its individual components (parsing/-
mutating/generating) can either be used standalone (say, generating in a black-box setting), or fully
integrated with format-agnostic fuzzers (where the popular AFL tool can be replaced by any even
more performant format-agnostic fuzzer).
   This versatility and modularity makes FormatFuzzer a platform for quickly creating and in-
tegrating novel fuzzing strategies and adapting them towards the setting at hand—in contrast to
fuzzers which have no knowledge about the input structure, or which use input specifications
exclusively for parsing or for generating. As our evaluation shows, both format-aware and format-
agnostic strategies have their specific strengths, further motivating the need for an integrative
platform.
   Another important aspect not addressed previously is that, by construction, FormatFuzzer
gives the tester control over what should be tested. By commenting out particular parts of a binary
template, FormatFuzzer allows to focus on specific features—say, those that were recently changed
or otherwise are critical. This adds to the versatility of fuzzing with FormatFuzzer.


8     RELATED WORK
8.1    Fuzzing with Input Specifications
Using language specifications for generating inputs is an old idea, especially for context-free gram-
mars. The different grammars such as regular, context-free, context-sensitive, and unconstrained
grammars were invented by Chomsky for linguistic applications [9] in 1950s specifically for parsing.
Using grammars for input generation was first suggested by Burkhardt [6], Hanford [26] and
Purdom [40] in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Logic languages [24] such as Prolog [55] which
are known from 1970s allow turning the entire program inside out, using the program itself to
generate the kind of inputs that it accepts. Free generators [22] are a recent formalism which also
unifies parsing with generation, as in FormatFuzzer. However, they focus on the generation of
data structures, such as type-classes in Haskell, while FormatFuzzer targets binary formats and
integrates with existing format-agnostic fuzzers.
111:26                                                     Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller


8.2      Context-Free Grammars
Grammar-based testing took off in the new millennium when researchers rediscovered the utility
of fuzzing, and how grammars can improve the effectiveness of fuzzing. One of the first to recog-
nize their use in fuzzing was Godefroid [21] who augmented whitebox fuzzing with grammars.
Other noteworthy grammar fuzzers include Gramfuzz [25], Grammarinator [28], Dharma [34],
Domato [20], and CSS Fuzz [41], as well as PolyGlot [7], which augments context-free grammars
with semantic annotations. LangFuzz [29] uses a language specification to collect code fragments
which can be applied as smart mutations. All these work on context-free languages, which are not
sufficient to specify binary formats.

8.3      Other Specification Languages
Besides context-free grammars, fuzzers have used alternate input specifications, such as regular
languages (i.e. finite state automata) [11, 54], or constraint languages [15]. SISL [50] uses a partial
specification which is complemented by the use of concolic testing [42]. MoWF [38] leverages a
specification expressed as a constraint over the input space. It uses selective symbolic execution
to identify uncovered branches, and can repair length fields, checksums and other validation
fields. The fuzzer by Pan et al. [37] leverages higher order attribute grammars to describe length,
checksums, and other validation fields, and uses them to generate file format inputs such as PNGs.
Parsifal [32] targets both parsing and generation of binary formats. It is, however, limited to fixed
size formats. Nail [4] defines a parser generator specification, and targets binary formats (typically
protocols) that contain offset fields and checksums, and unlike Parsifal, can handle more complex
constructs. Underwood [51] extends context-free grammars using attribute grammars, and provides
a mapping from binary format specifications to attribute grammars. Such grammars can be used
for parsing as well as generation. Beginner’s luck [30] is a language for generators that allows
the integration of sampling constraints to be used during fuzzing. libprotobuf-mutator [44] uses
protocol buffers to describe file formats, allowing the mutations to be done over the compact
protocol buffer representation. However, one disadvantage compared to FormatFuzzer is the need
to write a converter between the protocol buffer and the corresponding binary file.
   In principle, FormatFuzzer could make use of any of these format specifications, and still lever-
age its unique capabilities such as generating synchronized parsers and generators, or integrating
format-agnostic fuzzers. By using binary templates, however, FormatFuzzer can build on hundreds
of format specifications that have been created and refined by an enthusiastic community for more
than two decades now.

8.4      Fuzzing Strategies
CSmith [57] shows that embedding the entire language specification into the generator can lead to
effective fuzzing. However, with that, one loses the generality of being able to target other kinds of
inputs. Other notable research on grammar-based fuzzers include LangFuzz [29], Blendfuzz [56],
Skyfire [52]. Parameter sequences in Zest [36] and JQF [35] encode generator choices like our decision
seeds and can be used for generator-based testing in the style of QuickCheck [10]. Crowbar [16] and
CGPT [31] similarly also combine generator-based testing with coverage feedback, allowing both
generation-based and mutation-based fuzzing. However, obtaining the decision seeds by parsing
existing files, as well as applying smart mutations on them (Section 6.2) is a novel contribution of
FormatFuzzer.
   Several grammar-based fuzzers also incorporate coverage feedback from AFL. Notable examples
include Superion [53], Nautilus [3] and Grimoire [5]. However, those fuzzers were only applied to
text-based grammar input formats, such as markup languages (XML) or programming languages
FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats                                           111:27


(JavaScript, PHP, Ruby, Lua, C, nasm, SQL, SMT). So they would likely be unable to support features
required for binary file formats, such as size fields, checksums, or bitfields. Superion and Nautilus
would require a complete format specification to be written from scratch for each new format.
Grimoire, on the other hand, can mine format specifications, but only for textual languages.

8.5    Fuzzing Binary Formats
WEIZZ [18] and FFAFuzz [8] are fuzzers which target chunk-based binary formats. During fuzzing,
they try to learn how the chunk-based format is specified. Peach [17] is another fuzzer that targets
binary formats. AFLSmart [39] is a fuzzer that provides chunk aware mutations to the input, and
hence targets binary formats. It does this by maintaining a virtual structure of the input being
fuzzed in memory. AFLSmart is the closest related work to FormatFuzzer. However, since its
format specifications (Peach pits) had to be developed from scratch for use with AFLSmart, they
are less complete and comprehensive than our binary templates. Since FormatFuzzer can use
its binary templates not only for parsing, but also for generation, this enables additional fuzzing
strategies detailed in this paper.

9     CONCLUSION
In order to fuzz binary inputs, the most powerful solution is to create a dedicated fuzzer. However,
creating such fuzzers takes significant effort. With FormatFuzzer, one can leverage hundreds of
existing binary templates to make existing fuzzers format-aware. FormatFuzzer can readily use
such binary templates as parsers, which reveal the full structure of inputs. Extending existing
binary templates for generation unlocks fuzzing in black-box settings that are infeasible for format-
agnostic fuzzers. By providing decision seeds and smart mutations, FormatFuzzer can make any
fuzzer format-aware.
   While FormatFuzzer is a highly efficient choice for domain-specific fuzzing, its modularity
also makes it a useful platform for creating future fuzzers. Besides extending FormatFuzzer with
further formats, our future work will focus on the following topics:

Black-box strategies. Recent advances in grammar-based fuzzing, such as systematically achiev-
      ing grammar coverage [27] or learning and leveraging probability distributions [49] could
      easily be adopted for binary template fuzzing, too.
Search-based fuzzing. The decision seed format opens way for easily integrating alternate fuzzing
      strategies. Of particular interest is genetic optimization as part of search-based testing, since
      FormatFuzzer already implements mutation and crossover operations.
Mining binary formats. Recent techniques for mining context-free grammars from parsers [23,
      33] could be adapted to binary formats, simplifying template construction.
Mining binary constraints. Extending a (mined) syntactic template, we can track processing
      of individual input elements using dynamic tainting and dynamic analysis, and extract
      context-sensitive constraints from input processors.
Engaging the community. We will be creating tutorials and other material to engage the com-
      munity in writing binary templates. The Wikipedia list of file formats [2] lists more than
      1,000 formats—so there is still lots to do!

  FormatFuzzer and all supporting material is available as open source. For more information on
FormatFuzzer, see its project page

                                   https://uds-se.github.io/FormatFuzzer/.
111:28                                                                 Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Pit Jost, Andreas Hanuja and Steven Dlucik for their work in supporting binary templates
for multiple formats.

REFERENCES
 [1] 2021. Wikipedia: ffmpeg. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FFmpeg. Accessed May 2021.
 [2] 2021. Wikipedia: List of File Formats. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_file_formats. Accessed May 2021.
 [3] Cornelius Aschermann, Tommaso Frassetto, Thorsten Holz, Patrick Jauernig, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Daniel
     Teuchert. 2019. NAUTILUS: Fishing for Deep Bugs with Grammars. In Proceedings of NDSS 2019. https://www.ndss-
     symposium.org/ndss-paper/nautilus-fishing-for-deep-bugs-with-grammars/
 [4] Julian Bangert and Nickolai Zeldovich. 2014. Nail: A practical tool for parsing and generating data formats. In 11th
     {USENIX} Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation ({OSDI} 14). 615–628.
 [5] Tim Blazytko, Matt Bishop, Cornelius Aschermann, Justin Cappos, Moritz Schlögel, Nadia Korshun, Ali Abbasi, Marco
     Schweighauser, Sebastian Schinzel, Sergej Schumilo, et al. 2019. {GRIMOIRE}: Synthesizing structure while fuzzing.
     In 28th {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 19). 1985–2002.
 [6] W. H. Burkhardt. 1967. Generating test programs from syntax. Computing 2, 1 (March 1967), 53–73. https://doi.org/
     10.1007/BF02235512
 [7] Yongheng Chen, Rui Zhong, Hong Hu, Hangfan Zhang, Yupeng Yang, Dinghao Wu, and Wenke Lee. 2021. One Engine
     to Fuzz ’em All: Generic Language Processor Testing with Semantic Validation (to appear). In Proceedings of the 42nd
     IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (Oakland). San Francisco, CA.
 [8] Zehan Chen, Yuliang Lu, Kailong Zhu, Lu Yu, and Jiazhen Zhao. 2022. Fast Format-Aware Fuzzing for Structured Input
     Applications. Applied Sciences 12, 18 (2022), 9350.
 [9] Noam Chomsky. 1956. Three models for the description of language. IRE Transactions on Information Theory 2 (1956),
     113–124. https://chomsky.info/wp-content/uploads/195609-.pdf
[10] Koen Claessen and John Hughes. 2011. QuickCheck: a lightweight tool for random testing of Haskell programs. ACM
     SIGPLAN Notices 46, 4 (2011), 53–64.
[11] Baojiang Cui, Shurui Liang, Shilei Chen, Bing Zhao, and Xiaobing Liang. 2014. A novel fuzzing method for Zigbee
     based on finite state machine. International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks 10, 1 (2014), 762891.
[12] James "d0c_s4vage" Johnson. 2020. GitHub - d0c-s4vage/pfp: pfp - Python Format Parser - a python-based 010 Editor
     template interpreter. https://github.com/d0c-s4vage/pfp. Accessed August 1, 2021.
[13] James "d0c_s4vage" Johnson. 2020. GitHub - d0c-s4vage/py010parser: A modified pycparser to parse 010 templates.
     https://github.com/d0c-s4vage/py010parser. Accessed August 1, 2021.
[14] Oxford Brookes University (Second Edition) David Duce. 2003. Portable Network Graphics (PNG) Specification (Second
     Edition). https://www.w3.org/TR/PNG/. Accessed November 15, 2021.
[15] Kyle Dewey, Jared Roesch, and Ben Hardekopf. 2014. Language fuzzing using constraint logic programming. ACM,
     725–730.
[16] Stephen Dolan. 2021. Crowbar. https://github.com/stedolan/crowbar. Accessed November 15, 2021.
[17] Michael Eddington. 2011. Peach fuzzing platform. Peach Fuzzer 34 (2011).
[18] Andrea Fioraldi, Daniele Cono D’Elia, and Emilio Coppa. 2020. WEIZZ: Automatic grey-box fuzzing for structured
     binary formats. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis.
     1–13.
[19] Andrea Fioraldi, Dominik Maier, Heiko Eißfeldt, and Marc Heuse. 2020. AFL++: Combining Incremental Steps of
     Fuzzing Research. In 14th USENIX Workshop on Offensive Technologies (WOOT 20). USENIX Association.
[20] Ivan Fratric. 2019. Domato A DOM fuzzer. https://github.com/googleprojectzero/domato
[21] Patrice Godefroid, Adam Kiezun, and Michael Y. Levin. 2008. Grammar-based Whitebox Fuzzing. ACM, New York, NY,
     USA, 206–215.
[22] Harrison Goldstein and Benjamin C. Pierce. 2022. Parsing Randomness. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. OOPSLA (2022).
[23] Rahul Gopinath, Björn Mathis, and Andreas Zeller. 2020. Mining input grammars from dynamic control flow. In
     Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
     Foundations of Software Engineering. 172–183.
[24] Claude Cordell Green. 1970. The application of theorem proving to question-answering systems. Number 96. Management
     Information Services.
[25] Tao Guo, Puhan Zhang, Xin Wang, and Qiang Wei. 2013. Gramfuzz: Fuzzing testing of web browsers based on grammar
     analysis and structural mutation. In 2013 Second International Conference on Informatics & Applications (ICIA). IEEE,
     212–215.
FormatFuzzer: Effective Fuzzing of Binary File Formats                                                                 111:29


[26] Kenneth V. Hanford. 1970. Automatic Generation of Test Cases. IBM Syst. J. 9, 4 (Dec. 1970), 242–257. https:
     //doi.org/10.1147/sj.94.0242
[27] Nikolas Havrikov and Andreas Zeller. 2019. Systematically Covering Input Structure. In Proceedings of the 34th
     IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (San Diego, California) (ASE ’19). IEEE Press,
     189–199. https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE.2019.00027
[28] Renáta Hodován, Ákos Kiss, and Tibor Gyimóthy. 2018. Grammarinator: a grammar-based open source fuzzer. In
     Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGSOFT International Workshop on Automating TEST Case Design, Selection, and Evaluation.
     ACM, 45–48.
[29] Christian Holler, Kim Herzig, and Andreas Zeller. 2012. Fuzzing with Code Fragments. In Proceedings of the 21st
     USENIX Conference on Security Symposium (Bellevue, WA) (Security’12). USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA, USA,
     38–38.
[30] Leonidas Lampropoulos, Diane Gallois-Wong, Cătălin Hriţcu, John Hughes, Benjamin C Pierce, and Li-yao Xia. 2017.
     Beginner’s luck: a language for property-based generators. In Proceedings of the 44th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on
     Principles of Programming Languages. 114–129.
[31] Leonidas Lampropoulos, Michael Hicks, and Benjamin C Pierce. 2019. Coverage guided, property based testing.
     Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 3, OOPSLA (2019), 1–29.
[32] Olivier Levillain. 2014. Parsifal: A pragmatic solution to the binary parsing problems. In 2014 IEEE Security and Privacy
     Workshops. IEEE, 191–197.
[33] Björn Mathis, Rahul Gopinath, Michaël Mera, Alexander Kampmann, Matthias Höschele, and Andreas Zeller. 2019.
     Parser-directed fuzzing. In Proceedings of the 40th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and
     Implementation. 548–560.
[34] Mozilla. 2019. Dharma: A generation-based, context-free grammar fuzzer. https://blog.mozilla.org/security/2015/06/29/
     dharma/
[35] Rohan Padhye, Caroline Lemieux, and Koushik Sen. 2019. JQF: coverage-guided property-based testing in Java. In
     Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. 398–401.
[36] Rohan Padhye, Caroline Lemieux, Koushik Sen, Mike Papadakis, and Yves Le Traon. 2019. Semantic fuzzing with zest.
     In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. 329–340.
[37] Fan Pan, Ying Hou, Zheng Hong, Lifa Wu, and Haiguang Lai. 2013. Efficient Model-based Fuzz Testing Using
     Higher-order Attribute Grammars. JSW 8, 3 (2013), 645–651.
[38] Van-Thuan Pham, Marcel Böhme, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2016. Model-based whitebox fuzzing for program binaries.
     In Proceedings of the 31st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering. 543–553.
[39] Van-Thuan Pham, Marcel Böhme, Andrew Edward Santosa, Alexandru Razvan Caciulescu, and Abhik Roychoudhury.
     2019. Smart greybox fuzzing. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2019).
[40] Paul Purdom. 1972. A sentence generator for testing parsers. BIT Numerical Mathematics 12, 3 (1972), 366–375.
     https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01932308
[41] Jesse Ruderman. 2007. Introducing jsfunfuzz. http://www.squarefree.com/2007/08/02/introducing-jsfunfuzz/
[42] Koushik Sen, Darko Marinov, and Gul Agha. 2005. CUTE: A Concolic Unit Testing Engine for C. In ESEC/FSE’05.
[43] Kosta Serebryany. 2016. Continuous fuzzing with libfuzzer and addresssanitizer. In 2016 IEEE Cybersecurity Development
     (SecDev). IEEE, 157–157.
[44] Kostya Serebryany, Vitaly Buka, and Matt Morehouse. 2017. Structure-aware fuzzing for Clang and LLVM with
     libprotobuf-mutator. (2017).
[45] SweetScape Software. 2021. 010 Editor - Binary Template Repository - Download Binary Templates. https://www.
     sweetscape.com/010editor/repository/templates/. Accessed August 1, 2021.
[46] SweetScape Software. 2021. 010 Editor - Binary Templates - Parsing Binary Files. https://www.sweetscape.com/
     010editor/templates.html. Accessed August 1, 2021.
[47] SweetScape Software. 2021. 010 Editor - Pro Text/Hex Editor | Edit 160+ Formats | Fast & Powerful. https://www.
     sweetscape.com/010editor/. Accessed August 1, 2021.
[48] SweetScape Software. 2021. 010 Editor Manual - Writing Templates. https://www.sweetscape.com/010editor/manual/
     IntroTemplates.htm. Accessed August 1, 2021.
[49] Ezekiel Soremekun, Esteban Pavese, Nikolas Havrikov, Lars Grunske, and Andreas Zeller. 2020. Inputs from Hell:
     Learning Input Distributions for Grammar-Based Test Generation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2020),
     1–1. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2020.3013716
[50] Sören Tempel, Vladimir Herdt, and Rolf Drechsler. 2022. SISL: Concolic Testing of Structured Binary Input Formats
     via Partial Specification. In Automated Technology for Verification and Analysis: 20th International Symposium, ATVA
     2022, Virtual Event, October 25–28, 2022, Proceedings. Springer, 77–82.
[51] William Underwood. 2012. Grammar-Based Specification and Parsing of Binary File Formats. International Journal of
     Digital Curation 7 (03 2012), 95–106. https://doi.org/10.2218/ijdc.v7i1.217
111:30                                                              Rafael Dutra, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller


[52] Junjie Wang, Bihuan Chen, Lei Wei, and Yang Liu. 2017. Skyfire: Data-driven seed generation for fuzzing. IEEE,
     579–594.
[53] Junjie Wang, Bihuan Chen, Lei Wei, and Yang Liu. 2019. Superion: grammar-aware greybox fuzzing. In Proceedings of
     the 41st International Conference on Software Engineering. IEEE Press, 724–735.
[54] Ming-Hung Wang, Han-Chi Wang, You-Ru Chen, and Chin-Laung Lei. 2017. Automatic Test Pattern Generator for
     Fuzzing Based on Finite State Machine. Security and Communication Networks 2017 (2017).
[55] David HD Warren, Luis M Pereira, and Fernando Pereira. 1977. Prolog-the language and its implementation compared
     with Lisp. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 12, 8 (1977), 109–115.
[56] Jingbo Yan, Yuqing Zhang, and Dingning Yang. 2013. Structurized grammar-based fuzz testing for programs with
     highly structured inputs. Security and Communication Networks 6, 11 (2013), 1319–1330.
[57] Xuejun Yang, Yang Chen, Eric Eide, and John Regehr. 2011. Finding and understanding bugs in C compilers. In ACM
     SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 46. ACM, 283–294.
[58] Michał Zalewski. 2016. American Fuzzy Lop. http://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/afl. Accessed October 1, 2016.
