                                        Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN
                                        Controllers
                                        RAPHAËL OLLANDO, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
                                        SEUNG YEOB SHIN, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
arXiv:2411.08626v2 [cs.SE] 5 May 2025




                                        LIONEL C. BRIAND∗ , Lero SFI Centre for Software Research, University of Limerick, Ireland and University
                                        of Ottawa, Canada
                                        Controllers for software-defined networks (SDNs) are centralised software components that enable advanced
                                        network functionalities, such as dynamic traffic engineering and network virtualisation. However, these
                                        functionalities increase the complexity of SDN controllers, making thorough testing crucial. SDN controllers
                                        are stateful, interacting with multiple network devices through sequences of control messages. Identifying
                                        stateful failures in an SDN controller is challenging due to the infinite possible sequences of control messages,
                                        which result in an unbounded number of stateful interactions between the controller and network devices. In
                                        this article, we propose SeqFuzzSDN, a learning-guided fuzzing method for testing stateful SDN controllers.
                                        SeqFuzzSDN aims to (1) efficiently explore the state space of the SDN controller under test, (2) generate effective
                                        and diverse tests (i.e., control message sequences) to uncover failures, and (3) infer accurate failure-inducing
                                        models that characterise the message sequences leading to failures. In addition, we compare SeqFuzzSDN
                                        with three extensions of state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods for fuzzing SDNs. Our findings show that, compared
                                        to the extended SOTA methods, SeqFuzzSDN (1) generates more diverse message sequences that lead to
                                        failures within the same time budget, and (2) produces more accurate failure-inducing models, significantly
                                        outperforming the other extended SOTA methods in terms of sensitivity.
                                        CCS Concepts: • Networks → Programmable networks; • Software and its engineering → Software
                                        testing and debugging.
                                        Additional Key Words and Phrases: Software-Defined Networks, Software Testing, Fuzzing
                                        ACM Reference Format:
                                        Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand. 2025. Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful
                                        SDN Controllers. 1, 1 (May 2025), 46 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

                                        1   Introduction
                                        Software-defined networks (SDNs) [35], which have been applied in many domains such as data
                                        centres [28, 84], satellite communications [32, 54], and the Internet of Things [71, 75], have gained
                                        popularity due to the programmability of their controllers, enabling the deployment of network
                                        services through software. An SDN controller is a centralised software component in the SDN
                                        that enables the implementation of advanced network functionalities, such as dynamic traffic
                                        engineering [75] and network virtualisation [11]. However, implementing such functionalities
                                        ∗ Part of this work was done when he was affiliated with the Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability, and Trust

                                        (SnT) of the University of Luxembourg.

                                        Authors’ Contact Information: Raphaël Ollando, raphael.ollando@uni.lu, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Luxem-
                                        bourg; Seung Yeob Shin, seungyeob.shin@uni.lu, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Luxembourg; Lionel C. Briand,
                                        lionel.briand@lero.ie, Lero SFI Centre for Software Research, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland and University of
                                        Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.


                                        Please use nonacm option or ACM Engage class to enable CC licenses
                                        This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
                                        © 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
                                        ACM XXXX-XXXX/2025/5-ART
                                        https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn


                                                                                                              , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
2                                                        Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


increases the complexity of SDN controllers. Furthermore, having a centralised controller introduces
new attack surfaces (e.g., ARP spoofing for SDN [3, 81]) that can be exploited by malicious users to
manipulate SDNs. Hence, testing SDN controllers becomes even more important and poses specific
challenges compared to testing traditional networks, which typically lack software controllers and
provide static network operations.
   An SDN controller is a stateful software component that maintains a holistic view of the SDN,
capturing the state information of network devices, links, and the controller itself. This enables the
controller to provide dynamic network operations in an efficient and effective manner. However,
testing stateful SDN controllers is challenging. An SDN controller interacts with multiple network
devices through sequences of inbound and outbound control messages defined in the underlying
SDN communication protocol (e.g., OpenFlow [63]). If a failure can occur only in a certain state
of an SDN controller, discovering such a stateful failure requires engineers to identify message
sequences that bring the controller into that state. However, discovering such stateful failures is
a hard problem due to the potentially infinite number of possible sequences of control messages.
This is because the size of sequences is unbounded, and there are various types of control messages
with different sizes. In addition, even if engineers obtain sequences of control messages that cause
failures, manual inspection of these sequences is time-consuming and error-prone. This may result
in misunderstandings of the causes of failures and hence the application of unreliable fixes.
   Fuzzing techniques have been widely applied for testing various network systems [40, 50, 60, 66].
Among these, state-aware fuzzing techniques that do not depend on protocol specifications could
be considered for testing SDN controllers, as, to our knowledge, no existing state-aware fuzzing
techniques account for the specificities (e.g., architecture and protocol) of SDNs. For example,
AFLNet [66] constructs finite state machines (FSMs) based on the response codes generated by
the server under test and uses these FSMs to guide the fuzzing process. AFLNet employs common
byte-level fuzz operators, such as bit flipping as well as the insertion, deletion, and substitution
of byte blocks. However, AFLNet operates under the working assumption that communication
protocols embed special codes in response messages, which is not always the case, as in our
SDN context. StateAFL [60] infers FSMs based on the in-memory states of the server, leveraging
compile-time instrumentation and fuzzy hashing techniques; hence, it does not require response
codes. During the fuzzing process, StateAFL guides the generation of new inputs to the server
based on the inferred FSMs. It employs both byte-level and message-level fuzz operators, which do
not rely on protocol specifications. NSFuzz [69] uses a combination of static analysis and manual
annotation on the server’s source code to identify states based on program variables and construct
FSMs that capture the transitions between these states. It then performs FSM-guided fuzzing using
fuzz operators similar to those in AFLNet. However, the state-aware fuzzing techniques introduced
in this research strand are applicable to the server-client architecture by replacing a client with
a fuzzer. The fuzzer replays captured message sequences and modifies them during the fuzzing
process. In contrast, the SDN architecture differs significantly from the server-client architecture.
For example, in the SDN architecture, communication is initiated between an SDN controller and
switches, whereas in the server-client architecture, clients typically initiate requests to the server.
Additionally, SDN switches also communicate with one another to enable network communication
and services. Therefore, replacing an SDN switch with a fuzzer for testing an SDN controller is
challenging. Furthermore, the working assumptions of these techniques, such as response codes,
compile-time instrumentation, and source-code analysis and annotation, make them difficult to
apply when testing an SDN controller. SDN operators are more concerned with potential failures
that can occur in realistic scenarios, such as when a malicious user intercepts messages and disrupts
the SDN during its operation [26, 40, 50, 58, 62].


, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                       3


   There are some prior studies [40, 50, 62] that test SDN controllers by taking into account the
architecture and protocols of SDNs. For example, Delta [50] is a security assessment framework for
SDNs. It reproduces existing SDN-related attack scenarios and uncovers new ones through fuzzing.
Specifically, in fuzzing, Delta modifies control messages by treating them as byte streams and
randomising them. Beads [40] is an automated attack discovery tool for SDNs. In contrast to Delta,
Beads fuzzes control messages while adhering to the SDN protocol (i.e., OpenFlow), aiming to
create test scenarios that can exercise components beyond the protocol parsers of SDN controllers.
FuzzSDN [62] also adheres to the SDN protocol in its fuzzing process to test components beyond the
protocol parsers of an SDN controller. In addition, FuzzSDN employs machine learning techniques
to infer failure-inducing models that characterise the conditions under which failures occur, and
uses them to guide the fuzzing. These techniques position their fuzzers between the SDN controller
and the SDN switches to sniff and modify control messages, leveraging the man-in-the-middle
attack strategy [21]. Hence, they do not require any modifications, replacements, annotations, or
instrumentation of the components (i.e., switches and controllers) in SDNs, enabling the testing of
SDN controllers in a realistic setting. However, these techniques, which account for the architecture
and protocols of SDNs, do not consider the stateful nature of SDN controllers.
   Contributions. In this article, we propose SeqFuzzSDN, a learning-guided fuzzing method
for testing stateful SDN controllers. SeqFuzzSDN aligns with the aforementioned research strand
that leverages the architecture and protocols of SDNs. Hence, SeqFuzzSDN tests SDN controllers
in a realistic operational setting without requiring any compile-time instrumentation, manual
annotation of source code, and replacing an SDN switch with a fuzzer. Instead, SeqFuzzSDN sniffs
and fuzzes control messages exchanged between the SDN controller and switches by being aware
of the stateful behaviours of the controller. SeqFuzzSDN employs a fuzzing strategy guided by
Extended Finite State machines (EFSMs) in order to (1) efficiently explore the space of states of
the SDN controller under test, (2) generate effective and diverse tests (i.e., message sequences) to
uncover failures, and (3) infer accurate EFSMs that characterise the sequences of control messages
leading to failures. Note that since the SDN communication protocol specifies various message
fields, their values, and relations, guard conditions on state transitions in EFSMs are well-suited to
capture state changes associated with such message fields, values, and relations.
   We evaluated SeqFuzzSDN by applying it to two well-known open-source SDN controllers:
ONOS [7] and RYU [72]. Additionally, we compared SeqFuzzSDN against our extensions of three
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods—Delta [50], Beads [40], and FuzzSDN [62]—which were used as
baselines for generating tests for SDN controllers. We extended Delta, Beads, and FuzzSDN to
produce EFSM models, since these SOTA methods were not originally designed to generate such
models. It is important to note that, these three baselines are the best available options for evaluating
SeqFuzzSDN when testing SDN controllers by fuzzing control messages. Our experiment results
show that SeqFuzzSDN significantly outperforms the three baselines. Specifically, compared to the
baselines, SeqFuzzSDN generates more diverse and effective tests (i.e., message sequences) that lead
to failures, as well as more accurate EFSMs that characterise failure-inducing message sequences.
In addition, SeqFuzzSDN can be applied to large SDNs since its performance is independent of the
network size. Our complete evaluation results and the SeqFuzzSDN tool can be accessed online [61].
   Organisation. The remainder of this article is structured as follows: Section 2 provides the
background and defines the problem of testing stateful SDN controllers. Section 3 details the steps
of SeqFuzzSDN. Section 4 presents the empirical evaluation of SeqFuzzSDN. Section 6 compares
SeqFuzzSDN with related work. Finally, Section 7 concludes the article.




                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
4                                                                Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


                            control plane
                                                         controller


                            data plane
                                              p2 p3                    p4 p2
                                switch1                    switch2              switch3
                                      p1                 p1      p2              p1

                                 hosts             host2             host3       hostd


                                  : control channel            : data channel    p# : port


                                           Fig. 1. An SDN topology example.


2   Background and problem description
This section introduces SDN concepts, including the SDN architecture and control messages. We
then define the problem of testing stateful SDN controllers.
   Architecture. The SDN architecture [35] separates the network into the control plane and the
data plane, which is a key distinction from traditional networks that do not possess this separation.
In the control plane, an SDN controller provides network administrators with a global view of
the network, enabling centralised control over network operations. The centralised control allows
administrators to optimally manage network resources and to effectively enforce network policies.
Furthermore, an SDN controller provides engineers with APIs [35], enabling them to develop and
install custom applications on the controller to address system-specific needs (e.g., dynamic adaptive
traffic control application [75]). The data plane consists of SDN switches, which are responsible for
forwarding data messages (i.e., data packets) based on the instructions provided by the controller.
SDN switches are connected to hosts that generate and receive data messages. Such hosts can be
servers, clients, and IoT devices in a networked system. In the SDN architecture, the SDN controller
serves as the central software component that enables the provision of flexible and efficient network
services.
   Figure 1 depicts an SDN topology example that consists of a controller, three switches, and four
hosts. The controller communicates with the three switches via control channels that carry control
messages (e.g., OpenFlow messages [63]). The switches and hosts, on the other hand, are connected
via data channels that carry data messages encapsulated by standard network protocols such as
ARP [65, 67] and IP [65, 68].
   Message sequences. In the control plane of an SDN, an SDN controller exchanges sequences
of control messages with SDN switches to establish and manage communication among hosts,
monitor network status, and enforce network policies. In the data plane of an SDN, hosts exchange
sequences of data messages through SDN switches to transmit and receive various types of data,
such as audio and video streams. For example, Table 1 presents an example sequence of messages
aimed at discovering host locations (i.e., MAC addresses [65]) in the SDN network shown in Figure 1.
   Regarding the example sequence listed in Table 1, we consider an SDN setup in which the
controller in Figure 1 is unaware of a path across switches that enables the transmission of data
messages from hosts to hostd . The address resolution protocol (ARP) is typically used to map an IP
address of a host to its physical (MAC) address [65, 67]. The first ARP message 𝑚 1 generated by
hosts is an ARP request aimed at obtaining the MAC address of hostd . The ARP request reaches

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                       5


Table 1. An example sequence of messages for discovering host locations. The messages in this table are
generated by the hosts, switches, and a controller depicted in Figure 1.

 𝑚𝑖    message                             sender                 receiver                      channel
 1     arp_req(hostd )                     hosts                  switch1                         data
 2     pkt_in(arp_req(hostd ))            switch1                controller                      control
 3     pkt_out(arp_req(hostd ),flood)    controller               switch1                        control
 4     arp_req(hostd )                    switch1                 switch2                         data
 5     pkt_in(arp_req(hostd ))            switch2                controller                      control
 6     pkt_out(arp_req(hostd ),flood)    controller               switch2                        control
 7     arp_req(hostd )                    switch2                  host2                          data
 8     arp_req(hostd )                    switch2                  host3                          data
 9     arp_req(hostd )                    switch2                 switch3                         data
 10    pkt_in(arp_req(hostd ))            switch3                controller                      control
 11    pkt_out(arp_req(hostd ),flood)    controller               switch3                        control
 12    arp_req(hostd )                    switch3                  hostd                          data
 13    arp_rep(hostd )                     hostd                  switch3                         data
 14    pkt_in(arp_rep(hostd ))            switch3                controller                      control
 15    pkt_out(arp_rep(hostd ),port2)    controller               switch3                        control
 16    arp_rep(hostd )                    switch3                 switch2                         data
 17    pkt_in(arp_rep(hostd ))            switch2                controller                      control
 18    pkt_out(arp_rep(hostd ),port3)    controller               switch2                        control
 19    arp_rep(hostd )                    switch2                 switch1                         data
 20    pkt_in(arp_rep(hostd ))            switch1                controller                      control
 21    pkt_out(arp_rep(hostd ),port1)    controller               switch1                        control
 22    arp_rep(hostd )                    switch1                  hosts                          data



to switch1 that is connected to hosts . The switch then sends the ARP request to the controller
by encapsulating it through the packet-in control message 𝑚 2 . The controller is now aware of
the information regarding the source of the ARP request, i.e, hosts . However, since the controller
does not know the location of hostd , it instructs switch1 to flood the ARP request to the connected
switches using the packet-out message 𝑚 3 . The ARP request is then flooded in the network (via
𝑚 4 to 𝑚 11 ) until it reaches the destination hostd (via 𝑚 12 ). The destination hostd then sends the
ARP reply 𝑚 13 to switch3 in order to inform the source hosts of its location (MAC). Note that, at
this stage, since the controller knows the location of hosts , it directly instructs the three switches
with the exact directions (i.e., port numbers) to forward the ARP reply (see 𝑚 14 to 𝑚 22 ). After
this procedure, the controller usually installs forwarding rules for both ARP and IP messages to
the switches, resulting in different sequences of messages compared to the example sequence
mentioned above.
   Failures. Like any software component, SDN systems are susceptible to failures that can affect
their functionality. These failures may result in service disruptions noticeable to users. Numerous
studies have examined these failures in the context of SDN testing [40, 49, 50, 62, 77]. Furthermore,
the centralisation of SDN system logic within its controller makes it a critical point of failure.
A controller crash or loss of connection with the switches can disrupt the entire network. This
vulnerability underscores the necessity for thorough testing to ensure the system’s robustness and
reliability. Such testing entails exploring the state space of the SDN system, including scenarios
that are not easily reached. Unfortunately, no work has yet investigated how to automate such
state space exploration in SDN systems.

                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
6                                                                   Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


                                              SeqFuzzSDN
                                                                                             SDN
                        test
                                                                                           controller
                     procedure                           fuzzing
                      failure
                                                   fuzzing                        (fuzzed)
                     detection
                                                   results                         control
                    mechanism
                                                                                 messages
                                                                                                  control
                                                         learning                    ...         channel

                                                 extended
                         test                                       fuzzing
                                                finite state
                         data                                        plans
                                                  machine
                       failure-                                                              SDN
                      inducing                           planning                            data
                        model                                                                plane


Fig. 2. Approach overview. To test a stateful SDN controller, SeqFuzzSDN fuzzes control message sequences
guided by inferred extended finite state machines (EFSMs) that capture failure-inducing message sequences.



   Problem. SDN controllers are inherently stateful. They manage complex states that encompass
their internal states, the connected switches’ states, and the overall network states. When developing
and operating SDN systems, engineers must address system failures triggered by unexpected
sequences of control messages. Specifically, they must ensure that the system behaves acceptably
regardless of its current state. In SDN systems, a stateful controller is susceptible to entering
incorrect states, sending unexpected messages, or triggering system failures. These failures may
occur only when the controller, the connected switches, or the network reach specific states. For
instance, an erroneous control message may be handled correctly under nominal conditions, but if
the same message is transmitted during a state of ‘recovery’ of the system, a system failure may
occur. When such a failure occurs, engineers must determine the state of the controller at the time
of the failure and identify the sequence of messages that led to that state. Precisely identifying these
conditions is crucial, as it enables engineers to diagnose the failure with a clear understanding of the
conditions that caused it. Additionally, engineers can utilise this information to generate extended
sets of control message sequences for testing the system after implementing fixes. Our work aims
to efficiently and effectively test the controller of an SDN system by identifying control message
sequences that cause failures, and then automatically derive an accurate model that characterises
the sequences of messages leading to failures.

3     Approach
3.1    Overview
Figure 2 shows an overview of SeqFuzzSDN. SeqFuzzSDN takes as input a test procedure and a
failure detection mechanism. The test procedure specifies the steps required to (1) initialise the
controller under test, switches, and hosts in an SDN, (2) execute a use scenario, e.g., pair-wise
ping test [12], to test the controller, and (3) properly tear down the SDN based on the given use
scenario to test the controller again. Note that depending on the given use scenario, sequences of
control messages exchanged between the controller and switches can vary. The failure detection
mechanism, defined by engineers for the given test procedure, allows SeqFuzzSDN to determine
whether the controller fails. For example, unexpected communication breakdowns and significant
performance degradation can be considered as failures depending on the given test procedure.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                       7


Regarding the outputs of SeqFuzzSDN, it produces a test data set and a failure-inducing model. The
former contains sequences of control messages that are fuzzed by SeqFuzzSDN and lead to failures
detected by the failure detection mechanism. The failure-inducing model characterises sequences of
control messages leading to either successes or failures. When the failure detection mechanism does
not detect any failures, SeqFuzzSDN considers the corresponding message sequences as successful.
In summary, SeqFuzzSDN aims at generating a test data set that contains diverse failure-inducing
sequences of control messages and a failure-inducing model that accurately characterises them.
   SeqFuzzSDN is an iterative fuzzing method consisting of three steps (see Figure 2), as follows:
(1) The fuzzing step involves sniffing and modifying control messages that pass through the control
channel between the SDN controller and the SDN switches. Hence, it does not require any changes
to the SDN controller and switches. (2) The learning step takes as input the control message
sequences and failure detection results obtained from the fuzzing step. The learning step then builds
a model to characterise the message sequences. Specifically, the learning step infers an extended
finite state machine (EFSM) [1] that captures the controller’s behaviour in terms of state transitions
representing control messages received or sent by the controller. Unlike FSMs, EFSMs can capture
state transitions associated with data variables, which are essential for modelling state changes
caused by control messages. Indeed, control messages typically involve control operations that
depend on data (e.g., flow tables and packet statistics). The inferred EFSM contains two types of
final states representing success and failure, enabling SeqFuzzSDN to classify and predict which
sequences of state transitions (i.e., control messages) induce either success or failure. (3) The
planning step takes as input the EFSM inferred by the learning step and generates fuzzing plans.
These fuzzing plans aim to guide the fuzzing step in efficiently exploring the possible space of
control message sequences and discovering diverse failure-inducing sequences of control messages.
In the following subsections, we provide detailed descriptions of the three steps in SeqFuzzSDN.

3.2   Fuzzing
The fuzzing step of SeqFuzzSDN relies on the man-in-the-middle attack (MITM) technique [21],
which is widely used and studied in the network security domain. This technique enables Se-
qFuzzSDN to position itself between the controller under test and the SDN switches that are
communicating with the controller. Using MITM, SeqFuzzSDN can intercept control messages
and potentially fuzz them while ensuring that the controller and switches remain unaware of
the presence of SeqFuzzSDN. Furthermore, employing this attack technique allows SeqFuzzSDN
to generate realistic potential threats (i.e., unexpected sequences of control messages) that the
controller may face in practice.
   When fuzzing control messages, SeqFuzzSDN accounts for the syntax requirements (i.e., grammar)
defined in an SDN protocol (e.g., OpenFlow) to ensure fuzzed control messages are syntactically
valid. An SDN controller typically rejects syntactically invalid messages at its message parsing
layer [40]. Hence, producing valid control messages is desirable in practice to test the controller’s
behaviour beyond the parsing layer [40, 62].
   SeqFuzzSDN employs a mutation-based fuzzing strategy [88] in which fuzz (i.e., mutation) opera-
tors introduce small changes to sniffed control messages while adhering to the syntax requirements
of the messages. Below, we first describe five fuzz operators employed in SeqFuzzSDN that can
modify control messages and their sequences. We then describe in detail how SeqFuzzSDN uses
the fuzz operators.

3.2.1 Fuzz Operators. As shown in Figure 3, when SeqFuzzSDN sniffs a control message, it can
apply one of the following fuzz operators: deletion, insertion, duplication, delay, and modification.

                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
8                                                                                    Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand

                                      sniffed data                                                       control message                                                fuzz
               data                                                                                                                                           (applying one operator)
                        sniff    ba9bf1cf70d795d229...           decode           ba9bf1cf70            d795        d2         2          9       ...
              stream
                                                                                      field                                                              X            delete
                                                                                                                                     inserted message
                                                                  ba9bf1cf70   d795           d2        2       9        ...          ab1fcd            3b            insert
     SDN
    system                          ba9bf1cf70       d795   d2      2     9    ...    ba9bf1cf70            d795         d2           2       9         ...         duplicate
              fuzzed
                        inject
             message
                                                                     ba9bf1cf70      d795          d2       2        9         ...                                    delay


                                                                                      ba9bf1cf70            d795         d2           8       9         ...           modify

                                                                                                                           modified field




Fig. 3. A data flow example of fuzzing by applying either the deletion, insertion, duplication, delay, or
modification operator.


These operators are based on those used in Beads [40], with modifications tailored for the learning-
guided fuzzing of SeqFuzzSDN. We describe further details of the fuzz operators below.
Deletion. The deletion operator drops an intercepted message. For example, when SeqFuzzSDN
intercepts a packet-in message from the control channel, it can omit retransmitting the message to
the channel, thereby deleting the packet-in message from the control channel.
Insertion. The insertion operator inserts a new control message into the control channel. For
example, SeqFuzzSDN can insert a new packet-in message to the control channel while it sniffs
messages passing through the channel. Note that, such a new message is either predefined by
engineers or randomly generated, as configured in SeqFuzzSDN.
Duplication. The duplication operator duplicates a sniffed message. For example, when SeqFuz-
zSDN intercepts a packet-in message, it can copy the same message and resend both the original
and copied messages to the control channel. Hence, the channel carries the duplicated packet-in
messages.
Delay. The delay operator holds a control message for a certain amount of time. For example,
SeqFuzzSDN can hold an intercepted packet-in message for 200ms and resend it after the delay
time. When SeqFuzzSDN holds a synchronous message (e.g., barrier-request), the sender will also
wait for a response from the receiver. However, if SeqFuzzSDN delays an asynchronous message
(e.g., packet-in), the sender continues its processing without waiting for the receiver to respond.
Note that the delay time can be configured in SeqFuzzSDN.
Modification. The modification operator modifies the content (i.e., fields) of an intercepted control
message. For example, when SeqFuzzSDN intercepts a packet-in message, it can change the version
field of the message and inject the fuzzed message into the control channel.
   We note that the modification operator behaves differently for the initial fuzzing phase and the
subsequent learning-guided fuzzing phases. Algorithm 1 shows how the modification operator
functions during the initial fuzzing phase when there is no guidance available for fuzzing. Given an
intercepted message msg, the modification operator parses the content of msg in terms of its fields
(line 1). For each field 𝑓 of msg and a given probability pf of fuzzing a field, the operator replaces
its value with a random value within its syntactically valid value range (lines 2-7). For example, if
msg contains ten fields and pf = 0.2, after applying the operator, the expected number of modified
fields in msg is two. The operator then returns the fuzzed message msg ′ to transmit it through the
control channel.
   In the subsequent iterations of SeqFuzzSDN, the modification operator leverages planning
outputs obtained from the learning and planning steps (see Figure 2). For readability, we describe
the modification operator guided by learning in Section 3.5, after introducing the learning and
planning steps.


, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                       9


Algorithm 1 Modification: Syntax-aware random
Input:
   msg: control message to be fuzzed
   pf : probability of fuzzing a field
Output:
   msg ′ : control message after fuzzing

 1: 𝐹 ← get_fields(𝑚𝑠𝑔)
 2: msg ′ ← msg
 3: for all 𝑓 ∈ 𝐹 do
 4:     if rand(0, 1) ≤ pf then
 5:         msg ′ ← replace(msg ′, 𝑓 , rand_valid(𝑓 ))
 6:     end if
 7: end for
 8: return msg ′




3.2.2 Initial Fuzzing. During the initial fuzzing phase of SeqFuzzSDN, since no failure-inducing
model has been inferred, SeqFuzzSDN applies the fuzz operators randomly, as described in Al-
gorithm 2. The algorithm takes as input a probability pm of fuzzing a message. It then returns a
sequence seq′ of messages after fuzzing. While executing a given test procedure (see the repeat
block on lines 2-30 in Algorithm 2), SeqFuzzSDN intercepts each of the control messages passing
through the control channel between the SDN controller and switches (line 3). For each control
message msg and the given probability pm, SeqFuzzSDN decides whether it fuzzes msg or not
(line 5). When SeqFuzzSDN does not fuzz msg, it resends msg to the control channel and appends
msg to seq′ to record a processed message sequence (lines 6-7). For fuzzing the message msg,
SeqFuzzSDN randomly selects one of the five fuzz operators (line 11). SeqFuzzSDN then applies the
selected operator to msg and updates seq′ accordingly (lines 12-29).

3.2.3 Data Collection. To generate failure-inducing models, SeqFuzzSDN relies on an inference
technique that takes as input event traces and produces an extended finite state machine (EFSM),
such as Mint [82]. This EFSM captures the event traces as state transitions with guard conditions.
In our context, an event trace corresponds to a message sequence seq′ obtained from the fuzzing
step. Each event 𝑒 in the trace is associated with the corresponding message msg listed in seq′ .
Specifically, an event 𝑒 is a tuple (𝑙, 𝑚, 𝑣), where 𝑙 denotes the type of msg, 𝑚 denotes the fuzz
operator applied to msg, 𝑣 denotes the field values of msg. Note that 𝑚 can be null if msg is not
fuzzed in the given message sequence seq′ . For example, consider a control message sequence
in which a hello control message [63], used to discover and establish a connection between the
controller and switches, was delayed by 200ms using the delay operator. SeqFuzzSDN encodes
this hello message into an event 𝑒 as follows: (hello, delay : 200, < 0x5, 0x0, 0x10, 0xA34BF >),
where the field values of the hello message are version = 0x5, type = 0x0, length = 0x10, and xid =
0xA34BF. The last event in the trace indicates either success or failure, determined by the failure
detection mechanism for the given sequence seq′ of messages. In addition, the event 𝑒 is associated
with both the sender and receiver of msg, enabling SeqFuzzSDN to track this information.
   We note that, at each iteration 𝑖 of SeqFuzzSDN, the fuzzing step executes the input test procedure
(see Figure 2) 𝑛 times, determined by a time budget. Hence, for each iteration 𝑖, the fuzzing step
generates a dataset 𝐷𝑖 that contains 𝑛 event traces, i.e., |𝐷𝑖 | = 𝑛.

                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
10                                                       Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


Algorithm 2 Initial fuzzing
Input:
   pm: probability of fuzzing a message
Output:
   seq′ : sequence of messages after fuzzing

  1:   seq′ ← ⟨⟩
  2:   repeat
  3:       msg ← receive()
  4:       // no fuzzing
  5:       if rand(0, 1) > pm then
  6:            send(msg)
  7:            seq′ ← append(seq′, msg)
 8:             continue
 9:        end if
10:        // fuzzing
11:        op ← rand_select_fuzz_operator()
12:        if op is a deletion operator then
13:             // do nothing
14:        else if op is an insertion operator then
15:             msg ′ ← get_message(op)
16:             send(msg, msg ′ )
17:             seq′ ← append(seq′, msg, msg ′ )
18:        else if op is a duplication operator then
19:             send(msg, msg)
20:             seq′ ← append(seq′, msg, msg)
21:        else if op is a delay operator then
22:            𝑡 ← get_delay(op)
23:             delay_send(msg, 𝑡)
24:             seq′ ← delay_append(seq′, msg, 𝑡)
25:        else if op is a modification operator then
26:             msg ′ ← modify(msg, op)
27:             send(msg ′ )
28:             seq′ ← append(seq′, msg ′ )
29:        end if
30:    until the test procedure has finished
31:    return seq′



3.3     Learning
At each iteration 𝑖 of SeqFuzzSDN, the learning step takes as input a dataset 𝐷 of event traces
obtained from the fuzzing step through the 1st to 𝑖th iterations, i.e., 𝐷 = 𝐷 1 ∪ . . . ∪ 𝐷𝑖 . The
learning step then outputs an EFSM inferred based on 𝐷. The inferred EFSM 𝑀 is then used to
guide the fuzzing process, which entails exploiting state transitions in 𝑀, exploring less-visited
states in 𝑀, and discovering new states not captured in 𝑀. Furthermore, SeqFuzzSDN provides
engineers with an accurate EFSM, achieved through iterative refinement of 𝑀. This EFSM serves as
a failure-inducing model that characterises the generated failure-inducing message sequences (i.e.,

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                            11


                            ↑HELLO           ↓FEAT_REQ              ↑FEAT_REP           end (success)
          initial      S0               S1                     S2                  S3                       P
                                             ↓HELLO        ↑PKT_IN


                                                        ↓PKT_OUT
                                                                                         end (failure)
                                        S4                                         S5                       F
                                                 ↓PKT_OUT [modification]
                                                   (action_0_port >= 2)


Fig. 4. A simplified EFSM example produced by SeqFuzzSDN. The ↑ and ↓ arrows indicate that the corre-
sponding control messages are received and sent, respectively, by the controller under test.


event traces), enabling engineers to gain a more comprehensive understanding of failure-inducing
sequences rather than individually inspecting each of them.
   We note that, to infer an EFSM, SeqFuzzSDN relies on Mint [82], a state-of-the-art model
inference tool that takes as input a dataset containing event traces and produces an EFSM. We
opted to use Mint since it is one of the few tools available online and has been applied in many
software engineering studies [30, 74]. In addition, the implementation of Mint is the most reliable
among the tools available online, enabling us to focus on developing the main contributions of
SeqFuzzSDN.
3.3.1 States and transitions. An SDN controller takes as input control messages and produces
control messages in response, which are observable via MITM techniques [21]. In an EFSM inferred
by SeqFuzzSDN, which captures sequences of observed control messages, a state is a placeholder for
the transitions between different sequences of these messages, rather than representing a specific
internal condition of the controller, which is not visible to SeqFuzzSDN. In this state, the controller
is capable of processing a particular control message and generating a corresponding response
message. A transition is defined as a tuple (𝑠, 𝑙, 𝑐, 𝑚, 𝑑), where 𝑠 denotes a source state, 𝑙 denotes
the type of a control message, 𝑐 denotes a guard condition on the fields of the message, 𝑚 denotes
a fuzz operator applied to the message, and 𝑑 denotes a destination state. In an EFSM produced by
SeqFuzzSDN, using the dataset 𝐷 containing event traces, each transition (𝑠, 𝑙, 𝑐, 𝑚, 𝑑) corresponds
to an event (𝑙, 𝑚, 𝑣) in 𝐷 (see the event definition in Section 3.2.3).
   For example, Figure 4 shows an EFSM produced by SeqFuzzSDN, simplified for clarity. The
EFSM contains eight states in total. Among these states, state S0 represents the initial state of the
EFSM, state P represents the success state, and state F represents the failure state. Additionally, the
EFSM includes ten transitions. For instance, in the transition from state S4 to state S5, S4 serves
as the source state (𝑠), PACKET_OUT as the label (𝑙), action_0_port ≥ 2 as the guard condition
(𝑐), modification as the mutation operator (𝑚), and S5 as the destination state (𝑑). Note that the
arrow ↑ (resp. ↓) annotated before each label (e.g., ↑HELLO and ↓HELLO) indicates that a message is
received by the controller (resp. sent by the controller).
3.3.2 Guard condition inference. SeqFuzzSDN aims at efficiently producing an accurate EFSM that
correctly captures the event traces 𝐷. Since the overall accuracy of an EFSM highly depends on the
accuracy of transitions’ guard conditions, in this section, we first explain how SeqFuzzSDN uses
Mint to infer guard conditions from 𝐷. For further details, such as merging states and removing
non-determinism, we refer readers to the paper introducing Mint [82]. We then introduce how
SeqFuzzSDN efficiently infers an EFSM from 𝐷 in Section 3.3.3.

                                                                     , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
12                                                          Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


   Mint employs a supervised machine learning algorithm [85] that requires labelled datasets to
infer guard conditions of state transitions. To create labelled datasets, SeqFuzzSDN groups events
in the event traces 𝐷 into event groups 𝐸 based on the event type defined by (𝑙, 𝑚), where the
control message type 𝑙 and the fuzz operator 𝑚 are elements in an event 𝑒 = (𝑙, 𝑚, 𝑣). This ensures
that each group contains events with the same event type. For each event 𝑒 in an event group,
SeqFuzzSDN then labels 𝑒 with the type of the next event following 𝑒 in the corresponding event
trace of 𝑒 in the event traces 𝐷, as required by Mint. We note that one of the key reasons why
Mint labels each event with the next event type is to enable machine learning classifiers to learn
the guards that govern transitions between states, specifically identifying the conditions under
which a state that allows a given event can transition to another state that allows an event of the
next type. More precisely, given an event trace 𝑒 1 , . . ., 𝑒𝑖 , 𝑒𝑖+1 , . . ., 𝑒𝑛 , the event 𝑒𝑖 in an event group
is labelled with the type (𝑙𝑖+1, 𝑚𝑖+1 ) of 𝑒𝑖+1 . For each event group 𝐸, SeqFuzzSDN creates a dataset
that contains pairs of the field values of an event 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 and the assigned label of 𝑒.
   For example, Table 2 shows the creation of six datasets (see Table 2 (b)) from two event traces
(see Table 2 (a)). The datasets could be used to infer the EFSM presented in Figure 4. As shown in
Table 2 (a), Trace 1 and Trace 2 contain six distinct event types (𝑙, 𝑚): (𝐻 𝐸𝐿𝐿𝑂, null), (𝐹 𝐸𝐴𝑇 _𝑅𝐸𝑄,
null), (𝐹 𝐸𝐴𝑇 _𝑅𝐸𝑃, null), (𝑃𝐾𝑇 _𝐼 𝑁 , null), (𝑃𝐾𝑇 _𝑂𝑈𝑇 , null), and (𝑃𝐾𝑇 _𝑂𝑈𝑇 , modification).
For each event type, SeqFuzzSDN creates its corresponding dataset as presented in Table 2 (b). Note
that the third and last columns in the table indicate the content of a labelled dataset, including field
values of a control message and associated labels (i.e., the next event type).
   Regarding supervised machine learning, SeqFuzzSDN relies on RIPPER (Repeated Incremental
Pruning to Produce Error Reduction) [20], an interpretable rule-based classification algorithm.
RIPPER has shown successful applications in many software engineering problems involving
classification and condition inference [14, 37, 56]. In particular, we select RIPPER because it generates
pruned decision rules (i.e., if-conditions) that are more concise and, as a result, more interpretable
than commonly used tree-based classification algorithms, such as C4.5 [70], which are susceptible
to the replicated subtree problem [85].

3.3.3 Sampling Event Traces. Due to the computational complexity of the model inference problem,
existing model inference techniques (including Mint) face scalability issues [74]. Among the works
addressing the scalability problem, Shin et al. [74] recently introduced PRINS, which is the most
relevant to MINT, the EFSM inference tool we selected for SeqFuzzSDN. PRINS aims to improve
the scalability of EFSM inference for component-based systems. It employs a divide-and-conquer
approach, first deriving individual models for each system component based on their respective
logs. These component models are then systematically merged, incorporating the event flow across
components as recorded in the logs. However, PRINS is not suitable for SeqFuzzSDN, as it requires
prior knowledge of which system components generate logs.
   In the context of SeqFuzzSDN, the number of event traces can continuously grow as SeqFuzzSDN
iterates through the fuzzing, learning, and planning steps multiple times and fuzzes message
sequences corresponding to those event traces. Hence, when the number of event traces and their
events become large (e.g., 5000 event traces, containing 15000 events), Mint either crashes due to
running out of memory or takes a prohibitively long time to complete its execution. To address the
scalability problem in our context, when learning an EFSM at each iteration 𝑖, SeqFuzzSDN uses a
subset 𝐷 𝑠 of event traces instead of all event traces 𝐷 generated up to the current iteration.
   Let 𝑀 be an EFSM inferred at the 𝑖−1th iteration of SeqFuzzSDN. At iteration 𝑖, to sample event
traces from the event traces 𝐷𝑖 obtained at 𝑖 and those used in learning 𝑀, SeqFuzzSDN first
separate 𝐷𝑖 into accepted and rejected traces. Given an EFSM 𝑀, accepted traces are traces that are
already explained by 𝑀, i.e., traces that follow paths (i.e., transition sequences) in 𝑀. Note that

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                               13


Table 2. An example illustrating the creation of datasets based on event traces: (a) Two event traces (i.e.,
Trace 1 and Trace 2). (b) Six datasets created based on Trace 1 and Trace 2.

                                                    (a) event traces

                   event (e)                     label (l)                 mutation (m)                   value (v)
                        𝑒 10                      HELLO                             null                   𝑣 (𝑒 10 )
                        𝑒 11                      HELLO                             null                   𝑣 (𝑒 11 )
                        𝑒 12                    FEAT_REQ                            null                   𝑣 (𝑒 12 )
 Trace 1                𝑒 13                    FEAT_REP                            null                   𝑣 (𝑒 13 )
                        𝑒 14                     PKT_IN                             null                   𝑣 (𝑒 14 )
                        𝑒 15                    PKT_OUT                             null                   𝑣 (𝑒 15 )
                        𝑒 16                   end(success)                         null                     null
                        𝑒 21                     HELLO                        null                         𝑣 (𝑒 21 )
                        𝑒 22                     HELLO                        null                         𝑣 (𝑒 22 )
                        𝑒 23                   FEAT_REQ                       null                         𝑣 (𝑒 23 )
 Trace 2                𝑒 24                   FEAT_REP                       null                         𝑣 (𝑒 24 )
                        𝑒 25                     PKT_IN                       null                         𝑣 (𝑒 25 )
                        𝑒 26                    PKT_OUT                    modification                    𝑣 (𝑒 26 )
                        𝑒 27                   end(failure)                   null                           null

                                                       (b) datasets

    event type (𝑙, 𝑚)              event (e)                          value (v)              next event type (𝑙 ′, 𝑚 ′ )
                                        𝑒 10                            𝑣 (𝑒 10 )                 (HELLO, null)
                                        𝑒 11                            𝑣 (𝑒 11 )               (FEAT_REQ, null)
 (HELLO, null)
                                        𝑒 21                            𝑣 (𝑒 21 )                 (HELLO, null)
                                        𝑒 22                            𝑣 (𝑒 22 )               (FEAT_REQ, null)
                                        𝑒 12                            𝑣 (𝑒 12 )               (FEAT_REP, null)
 (FEAT_REQ, null)
                                        𝑒 23                            𝑣 (𝑒 23 )               (FEAT_REP, null)
                                        𝑒 13                            𝑣 (𝑒 13 )                 (PKT_IN, null)
 (FEAT_REP, null)
                                        𝑒 24                            𝑣 (𝑒 24 )                 (PKT_IN, null)
                                        𝑒 14                            𝑣 (𝑒 14 )              (PKT_OUT, null)
 (PKT_IN, null)
                                        𝑒 25                            𝑣 (𝑒 25 )          (PKT_OUT, modification)
 (PKT_OUT, null)                        𝑒 15                            𝑣 (𝑒 15 )              (end(success), null)
 (PKT_OUT, modification)                𝑒 26                            𝑣 (𝑒 26 )               (end(failure), null)



when guard evaluations are needed while SeqFuzzSDN walks over 𝑀 with traces, it uses Z3 [22], a
well-known and widely applied SMT solver. In contrast, rejected traces refer to traces that do not
follow any path in 𝑀. Hence, to create a set of event traces for learning a new EFSM 𝑀 ′ at iteration
𝑖, SeqFuzzSDN includes the rejected traces in the set in order to ensure that they are explained by
𝑀 ′ . However, SeqFuzzSDN does not include the accepted traces in the learning process because
they do not contribute to refining 𝑀 into 𝑀 ′ .
   SeqFuzzSDN then further separates the rejected event traces obtained from iteration 𝑖 of SeqFuz-
zSDN into success event traces and failure event traces. Drawing inspiration from the observation
that balanced datasets often yield higher accuracy in ML [8, 9, 85], SeqFuzzSDN manages two

                                                                        , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
14                                                       Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


Algorithm 3 Sampling event traces. Note that the sets of event traces used in this algorithm contain
only success or failure event traces.
Input:
    𝑀: EFSM
    D 𝑀 : set of success (resp. failure) event traces used to generate 𝑀
    D𝑖 : set of success (resp. failure) event traces obtained from the 𝑖th iteration of SeqFuzzSDN
    𝑛 D : maximum size of an output set of event traces
Output:
    D: set of success (resp. failure) event traces for learning a new EFSM

  1: // Case: include all traces
  2: if |D 𝑀 ∪ D𝑖 | ≤ 𝑛 D then
  3:     D ← D 𝑀 ∪ D𝑖
  4:     return D
  5: end if
  6:
  7:// Case: replace traces
 8: 𝑛𝑟 ← |D 𝑀 ∪ D𝑖 | − 𝑛 D // number of traces to replace
 9: for 𝑛𝑟 times do
10:     G ← group_by_path(D 𝑀 , 𝑀) // G: set of trace groups
11:     𝐺 ← select_max_group(G)
12:     𝑡 ← rand_select_trace(𝐺)
13:     D 𝑀 ← D 𝑀 \ {𝑡 }
14: end for
15: D ← D 𝑀 ∪ D𝑖 // |D | = 𝑛 D
16: return D



distinct sets of event traces: one leading to success and the other to failure. These sets have the
same maximum number of event traces and are used together to learn an EFSM.
   Algorithm 3 presents our heuristic for sampling event traces. SeqFuzzSDN applies the algorithm
separately to both success rejected event traces and failure rejected event traces. The algorithm
takes as input an EFSM 𝑀 inferred at iteration 𝑖−1, a set D 𝑀 of success (resp. failure) event traces
used to learn 𝑀, a set D𝑖 of success (resp. failure) rejected event traces obtained from iteration 𝑖,
and the maximum size 𝑛 D of an output set D. The algorithm then outputs a set D of success (resp.
failure) event traces for learning a new EFSM. As shown on lines 1–5 of the algorithm, when the
size of D 𝑀 ∪ D𝑖 does not exceed the maximum size 𝑛 D , the algorithm returns D 𝑀 ∪ D𝑖 . Otherwise,
on line 8, the algorithm computes the number 𝑛𝑟 of event traces to remove from D 𝑀 to ensure
that the output set 𝐷 contains 𝑛 D event traces (see line 15). On lines 9-14, the algorithm removes
𝑛𝑟 event traces from D 𝑀 as follows: It first partitions D 𝑀 into groups, each containing event
traces that follow the same path in 𝑀. It then selects a group 𝐺 that contains the largest number of
event traces compared to the other groups. On lines 12-13, it randomly selects an event trace 𝑡 and
removes it from D 𝑀 . On lines 15-16, the algorithm returns D 𝑀 ∪ D𝑖 , where |D | = 𝑛 D . Note that
the selection mechanism on lines 10-11 aims at minimising information loss in D with regard to
learning an EFSM. Since the selection mechanism (lines 10-11) selects an event trace from group
𝐺 containing the largest number of event traces and removes the selected trace from D 𝑀 (lines
12-13), the remaining traces in 𝐺 will still contribute to creating a new EFSM that contains the
same path (i.e., no information loss after the removal) and accepts the remaining traces.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                      15


3.4   Planning
The planning step of SeqFuzzSDN takes as input an EFSM and outputs fuzzing plans to guide the
subsequent fuzzing iteration. The fuzzing plans are defined as sequences of state transitions, i.e.,
paths in an EFSM, that guide the fuzzing step at the subsequent iteration. SeqFuzzSDN produces
the fuzzing plans, aiming at (O1) exploring less-visited or new states of the controller under
test, (O2) improving the accuracy of a failure-inducing model (i.e., EFSM) and (O3) increasing
the diversity of message sequences (i.e., event traces) exercised for testing the controller. Hence,
SeqFuzzSDN employs a multi-objective search algorithm [23] to address the planning problem.
Below, we describe the multi-objective search-based planning approach in SeqFuzzSDN by defining
the solution representation, the fitness functions, and the search algorithm.
3.4.1 Representation. Given an EFSM 𝑀 obtained from the learning step, a candidate solution is a
set 𝐶 of sequences of state transitions (i.e., paths) in 𝑀 where each transition sequence starts from
the initial state 𝑠 1 of 𝑀 and ends at a state 𝑠𝑜 selected during search, representing a valid traversal of
𝑀. Depending on a fuzzing probability, each transition sequence in 𝐶 can be associated with a fuzz
operator 𝑚𝑜 —deletion, insertion, duplication, delay, or modification described in Section 3.2.1—to
be applied when the controller’s state is 𝑠𝑜 in the subsequent iteration of SeqFuzzSDN.
3.4.2 Fitness Functions. SeqFuzzSDN aims at searching for candidate solutions with regard to the
three objectives: (O1) coverage, (O2) accuracy, and (O3) diversity, described earlier. To quantify
how a candidate solution fits these three objectives, below we define three fitness functions.
    Coverage. SeqFuzzSDN relies on an EFSM 𝑀 that models the state changes of the controller
under test. To test various behaviours of the controller, SeqFuzzSDN aims at finding a candidate
solution that ensures a similar (ideally equal) number of visits to each state in 𝑀. Hence, each state
in 𝑀 can be explored in different ways regarding how is reached and what happens after traversing
it. Given an EFSM 𝑀 at iteration 𝑖 of SeqFuzzSDN and a set 𝐷 of event traces obtained from the
first to the 𝑖th iterations, SeqFuzzSDN counts the number of visits for each state in 𝑀 by traversing
𝑀 using each event trace in 𝐷.
    To quantify the extent to which a candidate solution 𝐶 satisfies the coverage objective regarding
the state-visit numbers, SeqFuzzSDN leverages Shannon’s Entropy [73]. In general, entropy char-
acterises the average level of uncertainty inherent to the stochastic variable’s possible outcomes.
In our context, the entropy defines the level of uncertainty associated with visits to a state in an
EFSM 𝑀. Intuitively, the higher the entropy, the more evenly the states in 𝑀 are visited.
    Let 𝑆 be a set of all states in an EFSM 𝑀 obtained at iteration 𝑖 and 𝐷 be a set of event traces
obtained from the first to the 𝑖th iterations. For each state 𝑠 ∈ 𝑆, we denote by nv(𝑠, 𝐶) the sum of
the following: (1) the number of visits to 𝑠 by the event traces in 𝐷, and (2) the number of visits to 𝑠
expected by a candidate
                   Í        solution 𝐶. We denote by nv(𝑆, 𝐶) the total number of state visits for 𝑆 and
define nv(𝑆) = 𝑠 ∈𝑆 nv(𝑠, 𝐶). Based on Shannon’s entropy equation, we formulate the following
fitness function fitcov(𝑆, 𝐶) for the coverage objective as below. SeqFuzzSDN aims at maximising
the fitness fitcov(𝑆, 𝐶).
                                                 ∑︁ nv(𝑠, 𝐶)        nv(𝑠, 𝐶)
                                fitcov(𝑆, 𝐶) = −               log2
                                                 𝑠 ∈𝑆
                                                      nv(𝑆, 𝐶)      nv(𝑆, 𝐶)
   We note that, in practice, an EFSM inference technique is not always able to infer an EFSM 𝑀
that allows the traversal of all event traces in 𝐷 [82]. Hence, SeqFuzzSDN computes nv(𝑠, 𝐶) using
those event traces in 𝐷 that are traceable by 𝑀 and a candidate solution 𝐶. To improve the accuracy
of an inferred EFSM over iterations of SeqFuzzSDN, it accounts for an additional fitness function
described below.

                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
16                                                                    Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


   Accuracy. SeqFuzzSDN builds an EFSM 𝑀 using Mint, which relies on supervised machine
learning. Recall from Section 3.3 that Mint converts the event traces 𝐷 into labelled training
datasets (i.e., event groups) for building supervised classifiers. Hence, building accurate classifiers
is beneficial to improve the overall accuracy of an EFSM 𝑀.
   Note that the imbalance problem [85] is one of the main reasons that usually cause the low
performance of supervised classification algorithms. In a labelled dataset, when the number of data
instances of a class is significantly different from that of the other classes, classification algorithms
tend to favour predicting the majority class, which is often not desirable in practice [85]. Hence,
SeqFuzzSDN aims to address imbalance by planning to generate control message sequences that
alleviate the problem.
   To quantitatively assess the imbalance problem of each event group 𝐸 (i.e., labelled training
dataset) converted from the event traces 𝐷, SeqFuzzSDN uses the multi-class imbalance metric [55].
Given an event group 𝐸 obtained from the event traces 𝐷, we denote by nc(𝐸) the number of classes
in 𝐸, ni(𝐸) the number of data instances in 𝐸, and ni(𝑐) the number of data instances labelled
with the class 𝑐. According to the multi-class imbalance metric, the imbalance ratio ir (𝐸) of 𝐸 is
computed as follows:
                                          nc(𝐸) − 1 ∑︁         ni(𝑐)
                                 ir (𝐸) =
                                            nc(𝐸) 𝑐 in 𝐸 ni(𝐸) − ni(𝑐)

    For example, consider an event group 𝐸 that consists of three classes (nc(𝐸) = 3)—namely
𝑐 1, 𝑐 2, 𝑐 3 —along with a total of 1200 data instances (𝑛𝑖 (𝐸) = 1200). In the case where the class
distribution is balanced (i.e., ni(𝑐 1 ) = ni(𝑐 2 ) = ni(𝑐 3 ) = 400), the imbalance ratio is ir (𝐸) = 1.
However, in a situation where the class distribution is imbalanced, such as ni(𝑐 1 ) = 5, ni(𝑐 2 ) = 200,
ni(𝑐 3 ) = 995, the imbalance ratio increases to ir (𝐸) ≈ 3.37.
    To estimate the degree to which a candidate solution 𝐶 (i.e., fuzzing plan) impacts the imbalance
problem, SeqFuzzSDN augments each event group 𝐸 obtained from the event traces 𝐷 using 𝐶. Recall
from Section 3.3 that each event group 𝐸 contains events that have the same event type. The class
assigned to an event 𝑒 in 𝐸 is determined by the event following 𝑒 in the corresponding event trace
(i.e., message sequence) containing 𝑒. Hence, we can estimate how many new events will be added to
each event group when SeqFuzzSDN generates message sequences guided by a candidate solution
𝐶. Precisely, given a sequence (𝑠 1, 𝑙 1, 𝑚 1, 𝑐 1, 𝑑 1 ), . . ., (𝑠𝑖 , 𝑙𝑖 , 𝑚𝑖 , 𝑐𝑖 , 𝑑𝑖 ), (𝑠𝑖+1, 𝑙𝑖+1, 𝑚𝑖+1, 𝑐𝑖+1, 𝑑𝑖+1 ), . . .,
(𝑠𝑜 , 𝑙𝑜 , 𝑚𝑜 , 𝑐𝑜 , 𝑑𝑜 ) of state transitions in 𝐶, SeqFuzzSDN can, for example, augment an event group
𝐸 that corresponds to the event type (𝑙𝑖 , 𝑚𝑖 ) with a new event that is labelled with (𝑙𝑖+1, 𝑚𝑖+1 ). We
denote by ir (𝐸, 𝐶) the imbalance ratio of an event group that contains both the labelled events
in the event group 𝐸 and the augmented events from 𝐶. Below, we define the fitness function
fitacc(𝐷, 𝐶) for the accuracy objective, where ng(𝐷) denotes the number of event groups in 𝐷.
SeqFuzzSDN aims at maximising the fitness fitacc(𝐷, 𝐶).
                                                         ∑︁
                                         fitacc(𝐷, 𝐶) =        ir (𝐸, 𝐶)/ng(𝐷)
                                                             𝐸 in 𝐷

  Diversity. SeqFuzzSDN aims at testing the controller under test using diverse sequences of
control messages. To this end, at each iteration 𝑖 of SeqFuzzSDN, it plans to guide fuzzing in the
𝑖+1th iteration to generate sequences of control messages that are different from the sequences
exercised from the first to the 𝑖th iterations, which are captured in the event traces 𝐷. Given a
candidate solution 𝐶, SeqFuzzSDN quantifies the difference between 𝐷 and event traces (i.e., message
sequences) that can be produced by 𝐶 using the normalised compression distance (NCD) [18]. NCD
measures the difference between two objects 𝑋 and 𝑌 based on their compression, the Kolmogorov

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                                      17


complexity [43], and the information distance [6]. Precisely, NCD(𝑋, 𝑌 ) is defined as follows:
                                                         𝑍 (𝑋𝑌 ) − min{𝑍 (𝑋 ), 𝑍 (𝑌 )}
                                      NCD(𝑋, 𝑌 ) =
                                                             max{𝑍 (𝑋 ), 𝑍 (𝑌 )}
where 𝑍 () is an actual compressor such as gzip [25], 𝑍 (𝑋 ) and 𝑍 (𝑌 ) are the compressed sizes of
the objects 𝑋 and 𝑌 , and 𝑍 (𝑋, 𝑌 ) is the compressed size of the concatenation of 𝑋 and 𝑌 . Note that
NCD(𝑋, 𝑌 ) = 0 indicates that the two objects are identical in terms of compressed information.
In contrast, NCD(𝑋, 𝑌 ) = 1 + 𝜖 implies that they are distinct, where 𝜖 is a small positive value
dependent on how closely the compressor 𝑍 approximates the Kolmogorov complexity. We opt
to use NCD because it is applicable for comparing two sets of event traces, wherein individual
events can have different message types, fuzz operators, and field values. Furthermore, the lengths
of the event traces may differ from one another, and the two sets contain different numbers of
event traces. Hence, applying simple sequence comparison methods is not straightforward in our
context.
   Given the event traces 𝐷, in order to use NCD as the diversity fitness for a candidate solution 𝐶,
SeqFuzzSDN converts 𝐶 into event traces 𝑇 𝐶 to be generated in the subsequent iteration. Specifically,
for each transition sequence 𝑝 = (𝑠 1, 𝑙 1, 𝑚 1, 𝑐 1, 𝑑 1 ), . . ., (𝑠𝑖 , 𝑙𝑖 , 𝑚𝑖 , 𝑐𝑖 , 𝑑𝑖 ), (𝑠𝑖+1, 𝑙𝑖+1, 𝑚𝑖+1, 𝑐𝑖+1, 𝑑𝑖+1 ), . . .,
(𝑠𝑜 , 𝑙𝑜 , 𝑚𝑜 , 𝑐𝑜 , 𝑑𝑜 ) in 𝐶, the sequence 𝑝 is converted into an event trace tr = (𝑙 1, 𝑚 1, nil), . . ., (𝑙𝑖 , 𝑚𝑖 , nil),
(𝑙𝑖+1, 𝑚𝑖+1, nil), . . ., (𝑙𝑜 , 𝑚𝑜 , nil) by excluding the source and destination states 𝑠 and 𝑑 from the
transitions while preserving their message type 𝑙 and the fuzz operator 𝑚, along with their original
order. Note that, in predicted event traces, field values are set to nil (i.e., 𝑣𝑖 = nil) since transition
sequences do not capture field values.
   To quantify the degree to which a candidate solution 𝐶 is different from the event traces 𝐷, we
denote by 𝑇 𝐶 the predicted event traces when fuzzing is guided by 𝐶, and below, we define the
fitness function fitdiv(𝐷, 𝐶) to address the diversity objective. SeqFuzzSDN aims at maximising the
fitness fitdiv(𝐷, 𝐶).
                                           fitdiv(𝐷, 𝐶) = NCD(D, D ∪ T C )
3.4.3 Computational search. SeqFuzzSDN employs NSGA-II (Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic
Algorithm II) [24], which has been applied in many software engineering studies [15, 45–47, 53, 76],
to search for a near-optimal fuzzing plan (i.e., solution 𝐶). Algorithm 4 describes the search process.
Briefly, the algorithm first generates an initial population P (lines 1-6), containing 𝑛𝑝 candidate
solutions. Subsequently, the algorithm evolves the population iteratively until finding the ideal
Pareto front or the allocated time budget is exhausted (line 9-24). At each iteration, the algorithm
evaluates each candidate solution 𝐶 ∈ P according to the fitness functions defined in section 3.4.2
(line 11-15). The algorithm then updates the archive P𝛼 (lines 16-17). It then computes the Pareto
ranking of the solutions in the archive P𝛼 , along with their associated sparsity values (line 18-19).
These sparsity values quantify the distribution of optimal solutions based on their fitness values.
These ranks and sparsities are used to select the appropriate 𝑛𝑝 solutions to be kept in the archive,
as well as to identify the best Pareto front (line 20-21). The algorithm then creates a new population
P by breeding the solutions in the archive (lines 22-23). After the search process (lines 9-24), the
algorithm returns a selected solution (lines 25-26). Below, we describe in detail the initial population
generation, breeding, and solution selection mechanisms that are specific to SeqFuzzSDN.
   Initial population. Given an EFSM 𝑀, SeqFuzzSDN generates an initial population for the search,
containing 𝑛 candidate solutions. Algorithm 5 describes how SeqFuzzSDN creates a candidate
solution at the beginning of the search process (see line 4 of Algorithm 4). Algorithm 5 takes as
input an EFSM 𝑀, the number 𝑛 of transition sequences in a candidate solution 𝐶, a probability 𝜇
of fuzzing a message, and the number 𝑘 of (different) shortest paths. At each iteration of the repeat

                                                                             , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
18                                                       Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


Algorithm 4 Searching best candidate traces to be used in the EFSM-guided fuzzing step, based on
NSGA-II.
Input:
   𝑀: An EFSM
   𝐷: A set of generated event traces
   𝑛𝑝 : size of the population and the archive
   𝑛𝑠 : size of a candidate solution
   𝑛𝑘 : number of shortest paths used during the generation of a candidate solution
   𝜇 𝑓 : candidate solution fuzzing probability
   𝜇𝑐 : crossover probability
   𝜇𝑚 : mutation probability
Output:
   𝐶𝑏 : Best solution

  1:   // generate the initial population
  2:   P←∅
  3:   repeat
  4:       𝐶 ← GenerateCandidate(𝑀, 𝑛𝑠 , 𝜇 𝑓 , 𝑛𝑘 )
  5:       P ← P ∪𝐶
  6:   until |P| = 𝑛𝑝
  7:   // create an empty archive
  8:   P𝛼 ← ∅
 9:    repeat
10:        // assess the fitness of each individual
11:        for each 𝐶 ∈ P do
12:             𝑓1 (𝐶) = fitcov(states(𝑀), 𝐶)
13:             𝑓2 (𝐶) = fitacc(𝐷, 𝐶)
14:             𝑓3 (𝐶) = fitdiv(𝐷, 𝐶)
15:        end for
16:        // update the archive
17:        P𝛼 ← P𝛼 ∪ P
18:        ComputeFrontRanks(P𝛼 )
19:        ComputeSparsities(P𝛼 )
20:        P𝛼 ← SelectArchive(P𝛼 , 𝑛𝑝 )
21:        BestFront ← ParetoFront(P𝛼 )
22:        // create a new population
23:        P ← Breed(P𝛼 , 𝑛𝑝 , 𝜇𝑐 , 𝜇𝑚 )
24:    until BestFront is the ideal Pareto front or the algorithm run out of time
25:    𝐶𝑏 ← SelectOne(𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐹𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑡)
26:    return 𝐶𝑏


block (lines 2-11), the algorithm finds a transition sequence 𝑝 to be added into 𝐶, and this process is
repeated 𝑛 times. To find a transition sequence 𝑝, the algorithm first randomly selects a state 𝑠 in 𝑀
(line 3). It then finds the 𝑘 shortest paths from the initial state of 𝑀 to the selected state 𝑠 using the
k-shortest path algorithm [31] (line 4). SeqFuzzSDN uses the 𝑘-shortest path algorithm to obtain
different transition sequences (paths) from the initial state to 𝑠. Given the fuzzing probability 𝜇,
the algorithm decides whether it applies a fuzz operator or not (line 6). If the algorithm decides to

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                                19


Algorithm 5 Creating a candidate solution
Input:
   M: EFSM to generate a candidate solution (i.e., paths on M)
   n: size of a candidate solution
   𝜇 : probability of fuzzing a message
   k: number of shortest paths to generate
Output:
   𝐶 : candidate solution

 1:   𝐶←∅
 2:   repeat n times
 3:      𝑠 ← rand_select_state(𝑀)
 4:      𝑃 ← find_k_shortest_paths(𝑀, 𝑠, 𝑘)
 5:      𝑝 ← rand_select_path(𝑀, 𝑃)
 6:      if rand(0, 1) ≤ 𝜇 then
 7:          op ← rand_select_fuzz_operator()
 8:          associate_fuzz_operator(𝑝, 𝑠, op)
 9:      end if
10:      𝐶 ← 𝐶 ∪ {𝑝}
11:   end
12:   return 𝐶


                              initial                    initial         initial                     initial


                               S0                         S0              S0                          S0


                               S3
                    S1                    S5              S1              S5                          S1
                               S4


                 select        S2         S               S2              S2                          S2

                                                                                                   [delay]

                               (a)                                 (b)                                (c)


Fig. 5. An example illustration of generating a candidate solution from a simple EFSM: (a) a simple EFSM for
clarity, (b) two shortest paths from S0 to S2, and (c) a candidate solution and its associated fuzz operator, i.e.,
delay.


apply a fuzz operator, the algorithm randomly selects one of the five fuzz operators described in
Section 3.2.1 (line 7). It then associates the transition sequence 𝑝 with the selected fuzz operator
𝑚. This guides SeqFuzzSDN in the subsequent iteration to apply 𝑚 when the controller reaches
the selected state 𝑠 following the transition sequence 𝑝. Since we do not know what will happen
after applying 𝑚 in the subsequent iteration of SeqFuzzSDN, it allows SeqFuzzSDN to potentially
discover new states that are not captured in the current EFSM 𝑀.

                                                                         , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
20                                                                  Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


  For example, Figure 5 illustrates how SeqFuzzSDN generates initial candidate solutions using a
simple EFSM 𝑀 (Figure 5 (a)) for brevity. Given 𝑀, when Algorithm 5 selects state S2, it then finds
two shortest paths (Figure 5 (b)). After that, the algorithm randomly selects a fuzz operator (e.g.,
delay) to apply to the selected candidate solution.
    Breeding. The breeding mechanism uses the following genetic operators [24]: selection, crossover,
and mutation operators. SeqFuzzSDN employs the binary tournament selection and the one-point
crossover [24]. Specifically, given two parent solutions 𝐶 𝑙 and 𝐶 𝑟 , each containing transition
sequences (paths) {𝑝 𝑙1 , . . ., 𝑝𝑖𝑙 , . . ., 𝑝 𝑙𝑗 } and {𝑝 𝑟1 , . . ., 𝑝𝑖𝑟 , . . ., 𝑝𝑘𝑟 }, respectively, the crossover operator
randomly selects a crossover point 𝑖. It then generates two offspring solutions by swapping transition
sub-sequences separated by 𝑖 between the parents, resulting in {𝑝 𝑟1 , . . ., 𝑝𝑖𝑙 , . . ., 𝑝 𝑙𝑗 } and {𝑝 𝑙1 , . . ., 𝑝𝑖𝑟 , . . .,
𝑝𝑘𝑟 }. Further, SeqFuzzSDN relies on the uniform mutation operator [80]. Specifically, SeqFuzzSDN
first randomly selects a transition sequence 𝑝 in a candidate solution 𝐶. It then replaces 𝑝 with a
new transition sequence obtained with Algorithm 5, setting the parameter 𝑛 to 1 to create a single
transition sequence.
    Selecting a near-optimal solution. Algorithm 4, which is based on NSGA-II, outputs a set of Pareto-
optimal solutions, which are equally viable with respect to the three objectives regarding coverage,
accuracy, and diversity (described in Section 3.4.2). However, SeqFuzzSDN requires selecting one
of the solutions to guide fuzzing at the subsequent iteration. Various methods to select a near-
optimal solution in a Pareto front have been proposed in the literature, such as selecting a knee
solution [13], or selecting a corner solution [64] for a specific objective. In our context, SeqFuzzSDN
uses a knee solution, which is often favoured in search-based software engineering studies [13, 16].
This preference is due to the observation that selecting other solutions on the front to achieve a
slight improvement in one objective could result in a significant deterioration in at least one other
objective [13]. Given the three objectives regarding coverage, accuracy, and diversity, SeqFuzzSDN
favours a candidate solution that achieves a balanced optimisation across all these objectives.
    Given a selected set of candidate solutions, containing planned paths (state transitions), SeqFuz-
zSDN finds transitions that are associated with the modification fuzz operator and a guard condition.
It then solves the guard condition using Z3 in order to apply the modification fuzz operator, ensuring
the guard condition is satisfied during our EFSM-guided fuzzing (described in Section 3.5). For
example, given a state transition (𝑠𝑖 , ↑𝑃𝐴𝐶𝐾𝐸𝑇 _𝐼 𝑁 , 𝑓𝑘 < 20 ∧ 𝑓𝑘 > 8, 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑖 𝑓 𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛, 𝑠 𝑗 ), SeqFuz-
zSDN solves the guard condition, such as 𝑓𝑘 = 10. When the transition is exploited during fuzzing,
SeqFuzzSDN modifies a PACKET_IN message by assigning 10 to the field 𝑓𝑘 of the message. Note
that SeqFuzzSDN solves guard conditions during the (offline) planning step, rather than the (online)
fuzzing step, in order to improve efficiency during fuzzing.

3.5    EFSM-Guided Fuzzing
After the initial fuzzing step, SeqFuzzSDN uses the learning and planning outputs to guide fuzzing
sequences of control messages to test the SDN controller. This section first describes an EFSM-guided
fuzzing method in SeqFuzzSDN, and then illustrates the method through a running example.
3.5.1 EFSM-guided Fuzzing Algorithm. Algorithm 6 describes the fuzzing procedure in SeqFuzzSDN
once an EFSM 𝑀 is available, after the initial fuzzing step. The algorithm takes as input an EFSM
𝑀 and a set 𝐶 of planning paths (i.e., sequences of state transitions) on 𝑀, and iterates lines 2-19
until the test procedure has finished executing. At the beginning of each iteration, on line 3, the
algorithm first identifies the current state 𝑠 in 𝑀 according to the currently observed sequence
seq′ of control messages. On line 4, SeqFuzzSDN then finds a set 𝑃 of applicable paths from the
set 𝐶 of planning paths to guide fuzzing. The applicable paths contain state transitions on 𝑀 that

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                      21


Algorithm 6 EFSM-Guided Fuzzing
Input:
   𝑀: EFSM generated from the learning step
   𝐶: set of planned paths on 𝑀
Output:
   seq′ : sequences of messages after fuzzing
   𝐶 ′ : set of planned paths after applying one of them

 1:   seq′ ← ⟨⟩
 2:   repeat
 3:       𝑠 ← current_state(𝑀, seq′ )
 4:       𝑃 ← find_applicable_paths(𝐶, 𝑀, seq′ )
 5:       msg ← receive()
 6:       TN ← find_applicable_transitions(𝑠, msg, 𝑃)
 7:       op ← ∅
 8:       if TN ≠ ∅ then
 9:           tn ← rand_select(TN )
10:           op ← get_fuzz_operator(𝑡𝑛)
11:       end if
12:       if op is a fuzz operator then
13:           msg ← fuzz(msg, op)
14:           seq′ ← append(seq′, msg, op)
15:       else
16:           seq′ ← append(seq′, msg)
17:       end if
18:       send(msg)
19:   until the test procedure has finished
20:   𝑝 ← find_used_path(𝑀, 𝐶, seq′ )
21:   𝐶 ′ ← 𝐶 \ {𝑝}
22:   return seq′, 𝐶 ′


start from the current state 𝑠. Below, Algorithm 7 further describes this procedure. On line 5, the
algorithm receives a control message msg passing through the SDN control channel and then finds
a set TN of applicable transitions from 𝑃. The applicable transitions start from the current state 𝑠,
are triggered by an event type 𝑙 corresponding to msg, and, if there are guards, the guards hold
on the field values of msg. On lines 7-11, if some applicable transitions are found, the algorithm
randomly selects a transition tn among the applicable transitions (line 9), and gets the fuzz operator
op of tn, if tn has one (line 10). On lines 12-15, if the fuzz operator op is present, the algorithm
applies it to msg (line 13) and appends it (line 14) to the output sequence seq′ along with the applied
fuzz operator (op). On lines 16-17, if no fuzz operator is present, the algorithm simply appends the
originally received message msg to the output sequence seq′ . On line 18, the algorithm sends back
the msg, which could be fuzzed, into the control channel. Since, at each iteration of SeqFuzzSDN,
the test procedure is run multiple times, on lines 20-21, the algorithm removes a planned path that
has been applied, enabling the subsequent executions of the test procedure to be fuzzed, guided
only by the remaining planned paths.
   Algorithm 7 identifies a set 𝐶 ′ of applicable paths on an EFSM 𝑀 based on a given sequence seq
of control messages and a set 𝐶 of planned paths on 𝑀. On lines 1-3, the algorithm initialises a

                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
22                                                             Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


Algorithm 7 Finding Applicable Paths
Input:
   𝐶: set of planned paths
   𝑀: EFSM
   seq: sequence of messages
Output:
   𝐶 ′ : set of applicable paths

  1:   𝐶′ ← ∅
  2:   𝑝 𝑠 ← walk(𝑀, seq)
  3:   𝑠 ← current_state(𝑀, seq′ )
  4:   for each 𝑝 ∈ 𝐶, where 𝑠 is on 𝑝 do
  5:       𝑝 ′ ← SubPath(𝑝, 𝑠)
  6:       if for all 𝑠 ∈ 𝑝 ′ , 𝑠 ∈ 𝑝 𝑠 , and all 𝑠 appear in the same order on both 𝑝 ′ and 𝑝 𝑠 then
  7:           𝐶 ′ ← 𝐶 ′ ∪ {𝑝}
  8:       end if
  9:   end for
 10:   return 𝐶 ′


return set 𝐶 ′ of applicable paths on 𝑀, converts seq into a path 𝑝 𝑠 on 𝑀, and identifies the current
state 𝑠 on 𝑀 for the given seq. The algorithm then examines each path 𝑝 in 𝐶 to determine whether
the current state 𝑠 appears on 𝑝 (line 4) and whether the sub-path 𝑝 ′ of 𝑝 from the start state to 𝑠 in
𝑀 is a derivative of 𝑝 𝑠 that corresponds to the sequence seq of control messages (lines 5-6). If 𝑝 ′ is a
derivative of 𝑝 𝑠 , 𝑝 ′ can be derived from 𝑝 𝑠 by deleting some transitions without changing the order
of the remaining transitions. Recall from Algorithm 5 that SeqFuzzSDN uses the 𝑘-shortest path
algorithm to create planned paths. Hence, Algorithm 7 checks whether planed (sub-)paths on 𝑀
are derivatives of the paths in 𝑀 that correspond to sequences of control messages. The algorithm
then returns a set 𝐶 ′ of applicable paths that satisfy the conditions described above.
3.5.2 EFSM-Guided Fuzzing Example. Figure 6 presents a part of an EFSM 𝑀 (Figure 6a) inferred
from the learning step and three planned paths 𝐶 (Figure 6b) in 𝑀 created by the planning step.
Given the EFSM 𝑀 and the planned paths 𝐶, when SeqFuzzSDN begins executing the test procedure
(e.g., ping test), Algorithm 6 starts with the initial state 0 in 𝑀 to perform EFSM-guided fuzzing.
Then all the three planned paths, 𝑝 1 , 𝑝 2 , and 𝑝 3 shown in Figure 6b, are identified as applicable paths.
The algorithm then receives the first control message (generated by the test procedure), which, in
this example, we assume to be “↑HELLO”. In this case, however, there are no planned paths that
contain transitions starting from state 0 and taking the event (message) “↑HELLO”. Hence, the
“↑HELLO” message is sent back into the control channel without any modification. The “↑HELLO”
message is then appended to the output sequence seq′ , as follows:
                                                     seq′ = ⟨↑HELLO⟩
  After receiving the “↑HELLO” message, in this example, the algorithm receives three more control
messages, as follows: “↓HELLO”, “↓FEATURES_REQUEST”, and “↑FEATURES_REPLY”. In these
cases, the EFSM 𝑀 remains in state 0 since there are no transitions from state 0 that can be taken
by the three messages. In addition, there are no applicable paths. As a result, those messages are
sent back to the control channel, and the output sequence seq′ is as follows:
                    seq′ = ⟨↑HELLO, ↓HELLO, ↓FEATURES_REQUEST, ↑FEATURES_REPLY⟩

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                                                 23



                                                                   initial
                                                                                      ↓BARRIER_REQUEST
                                                                                                         3
                                                      ↓PACKET_IN               ↓FLOW_MOD
                                                                     0
                                                 ↓FLOW_MOD [deletion]
                               14

                                ↑PACKET_OUT                                                1        ↑BARRIER_REPLY

                                                                    91
                                                                                               ↓STATS_REQUEST
                               25                                       ↓ROLE_REQUEST


                                ↓FLOW_MOD                                                           2     ...

                                                                    92
                                                                        ↑ROLE_REPLY
                               27
                                      ↓ROLE_REQUEST

                                                                               ↑PACKET_OUT
                                                                               [duplication]
                                                                    26                         36
                                                      ↑PACKET_OUT                               ↑PACKET_OUT

                                ...
                                            63                      61
                                                      ↓PACKET_IN
                                      ...                                ...



                 (a) A partial EFSM example inferred from the learning step of SeqFuzzSDN.


                          ↑PACKET_IN                                               ↓PACKET_OUT
              p1 :    0                                                      14                                 25   [delay]


                          ↓FLOW_MOD [deletion]                                     ↓ROLE_REQUEST
                      0                                                      91                                 92
              p2 :                                                                        ↑ROLE_REPLY
                          ↓PACKET_OUT [duplication]                                ↓PACKET_OUT
                     26                                                      36                                 61   [modification]


              p3 :        ↓FLOW_MOD                                                ↓STATS_REQUEST
                      0                                                        1                                2    [delay 513ms]

          (b) Three planned paths to guide fuzzing, created by the planning step of SeqFuzzSDN.

Fig. 6. Output examples of the learning and planning steps: (a) a partial EFSM and (b) three planned paths
on the EFSM.



   Next, the algorithm receives the “↓FLOW_MOD” message, while the EFSM 𝑀 is in state 0.
Then, the algorithm identifies paths 𝑝 2 and 𝑝 3 as applicable paths since they contain transitions
starting from state 0 and taking the event “↓FLOW_MOD”. Among the two transitions, i.e., (0,
↓𝐹 𝐿𝑂𝑊 _𝑀𝑂𝐷, 𝑛𝑖𝑙, 𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛, 91) on 𝑝 2 and (0, ↓𝐹 𝐿𝑂𝑊 _𝑀𝑂𝐷, 𝑛𝑖𝑙, 𝑛𝑖𝑙, 14) on 𝑝 3 , the algorithm
randomly selects the second one on 𝑝 3 . Since no fuzz operator is associated to the transition, the
algorithm simply sends the message back to the control channel, and appends the message to the
output sequence seq′ of control messages, as follows:

          seq′ = ⟨↑HELLO, ↓HELLO, ↓FEATURES_REQUEST, ↑FEATURES_REPLY, ↓FLOW_MOD⟩

                                                                                          , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
24                                                            Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


   In the subsequent iteration of the algorithm, the current state of the EFSM 𝑀 changes to state 1,
as there is a transition from state 0 to 1 that takes the “↓FLOW_MOD” event. The algorithm then
finds only 𝑝 3 as an applicable path since it has a transition starting from state 1. If the algorithm
receives the “↓BARRIER_REQUEST” message, the message is forwarded to the control channel
without applying any fuzz operators, as there are no applicable transitions on 𝑝 3 , and is appended
to the output sequence seq′ .
   After this iteration, the algorithm changes the current state of the EFSM 𝑀 to state 6, since there
is a transition from state 1 to 6 taking the “↓BARRIER_REQUEST” event. In this case, there are no
applicable paths. If the algorithm receives the “↓BARRIER_REPLY” message, it sends the message
back to the control channel without any modification and updates the output sequence seq′ .
   Since there is a transition from state 6 to 1 in the EFSM 𝑀, in the next iteration of the algorithm,
the current state is set to state 1. Path 𝑝 3 is applicable in this situation. If the algorithm receives the
“↓STATS_REQUEST” message, the corresponding transition on 𝑝 3 is identified by the algorithm.
However, since there is no fuzz operator associated to the transition, the algorithm sends the
message back to the control channel and updates the output sequence seq′ .
   In the next iteration of the algorithm, the current state of the EFSM 𝑀 is set to state 2 by taking
the transition from state 1 to 2 due to the “↓STATS_REQUEST” event. In the state, path 𝑝 3 is
applicable. Note that, however, state 2 is the end state of path 𝑝 3 and is associated with the delay
fuzz operator, which holds a message for 513ms and then sends it back to the control channel.
This indicates that for any receiving message, the algorithm applies the delay fuzz operator. If the
algorithm receives the “↑STATS_REPLY”, it applies the delay fuzz operator. From the subsequent
iterations of the algorithm, no planned paths are applicable as 𝑝 3 has been exploited in its entirety.
Hence, the algorithm simply forwards the receiving messages to the control channel and updates
the output sequence seq′ until the end of the test procedure execution. After executing the test
procedure, we can obtain the following sequence of control messages, which leads to the SDN
controller failing:

     seq′ = ⟨↑HELLO, ↓HELLO, ↓FEATURES_REQUEST,
                             ↑FEATURES_REPLY, ↓FLOW_MOD, ↓BARRIER_REQUEST,
                                        ↑BARRIER_REPLY, ↓STATS_REQUEST,
                                                         ↑STATS_REPLY[delay 513ms], ↓ERROR, FAILURE⟩

4     Evaluation
In this section, we empirically evaluate SeqFuzzSDN. Our complete evaluation package is available
online [61].

4.1 Research Questions
RQ1 (comparison): How does SeqFuzzSDN compare against other state-of-the-art fuzzing techniques
for SDNs? We investigate whether SeqFuzzSDN can outperform state-of-the-art testing techniques
for SDNs, including Delta [50], Beads [40], and FuzzSDN [62]. We choose these techniques as
they rely on fuzzing to test SDN controllers and their implementations are available online.
RQ2 (ablation study) How does the sampling technique employed by SeqFuzzSDN influence its
performance? We assess the impact of the sampling technique (defined in Algorithm 3), which is
our heuristic for sampling event traces to learn EFSMs. Specifically, we assess the impact of the
technique in terms of execution time, the accuracy of EFSMs, and the diversity and coverage of the
fuzzing results. To achieve this, we compare SeqFuzzSDN with its variant SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 , which
does not sample event traces, and subsequently analyse the impact of the sampling algorithm.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                      25


RQ3 (scalability): Can SeqFuzzSDN fuzz sequences of control messages and learn stateful failure-
inducing models in practical time? We investigate the correlation between SeqFuzzSDN’s execution
time and network size. To do so, we carry out experiments involving SDNs of different network
sizes.

4.2   Simulation Platform
To conduct large-scale experiments, we employ a simulation platform that emulates the physical
networks. Specifically, we utilise Mininet [44] to create virtual networks of various sizes. Mininet
leverages real-world SDN switch programs, resulting in emulated networks that closely match
real-world SDNs. Hence, Mininet has been widely adopted in numerous SDN studies [40, 50, 62, 75].
   We note that SeqFuzzSDN can also be applied to actual physical SDNs. However, assessing
SeqFuzzSDN on actual physical networks through large-scale experiments, such as the ones reported
in this article, is prohibitively expensive in terms of both cost and time.
   Our experiments were conducted on 10 virtual machines, each equipped with 4 CPUs and 10GB
of RAM. Each experiment was conducted with a time budget of 5 days for ONOS and 3 days for RYU.
We note that, within this budget, the sensitivity values of the EFSMs generated by SeqFuzzSDN
reach their plateaus. Due to the randomness of SeqFuzzSDN, we repeated our experiments 10 times.
These experiments took approximately 60 days of concurrent execution on the 10 virtual machines.

4.3   Study Subject
We evaluate SeqFuzzSDN by testing two open-source and actively maintained SDN controllers,
ONOS [7] and RYU [72], both of which are still widely used in SDN studies [40, 49–51, 62, 77,
89]. Both controllers’ implementations are based on the OpenFlow SDN protocol specification.
SeqFuzzSDN, which fuzzes OpenFlow control messages, is therefore capable of testing any SDN
controller that adheres to the OpenFlow specification.
   For our evaluation, we created five virtual networks with 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 switches respectively.
Each network is managed by either ONOS or RYU. In each network, the switches possess emulated
physical connections with all the other switches, forming a fully connected topology. Each switch
is connected to two hosts, simulating devices that transmit and receive data, such as video and
audio streams.
   We note that the study subjects, comprising of 5 × 2 synthetic systems built on the five networks
managed by ONOS and RYU, are representative of both existing SDN studies and real-world SDNs.
For instance, in prior SDN studies testing ONOS and RYU, Delta was evaluated using an SDN
with two switches, Beads was evaluated using an SDN with three switches, and FuzzSDN was
evaluated on SDNs with 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 switches, due to the significant computational resources
required for conducting experiments with SDNs.

4.4 Experimental Setup
EXP1. To answer RQ1, we conduct a comparative analysis of SeqFuzzSDN with three other SDN
testing tools: FuzzSDN [62], Delta [50], and Beads [40]. FuzzSDN is a testing framework that
generates rule-based failure-inducing models and test cases. FuzzSDN employs a grammar-based
machine learning-guided fuzzing technique, which enables it to progressively refine the generated
failure-inducing models, offering interpretable models that describe the conditions leading to a
failure. Delta is a security framework designed for SDNs that allows engineers to automatically
replicate established attack scenarios associated with SDNs and uncover new attack scenarios
through fuzzing. Delta accomplishes this by changing control messages, employing a fuzzing
technique that randomises the control message byte stream, regardless of the OpenFlow protocol
specificities. Lastly, Beads is an automated attack discovery technique that relies on a range of

                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
26                                                              Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


mutation (fuzz) operators, with the aim of discovering attack scenarios. Beads also fuzzes control
messages but employs strategies such as message dropping, duplication, delay, and modification
while adhering to the OpenFlow specification. This allows Beads to generate fuzzed control
messages that can pass beyond the message parsing layer of the system under test.
   To compare SeqFuzzSDN with these three SDN testing tools, we create three baselines: FuzzSDN𝐸 ,
Delta𝐸 and Beads𝐸 . These baselines extend FuzzSDN, Delta and Beads respectively, to infer
EFSMs, as the original testing tools do not produce EFSMs as part of their test outputs. FuzzSDN𝐸
(resp. Delta𝐸 and Beads𝐸 ) encodes the fuzzed control messages and the test output (i.e., success
and failure) as a dataset to infer EFSMs. The baselines then use Mint to generate EFSMs. Unlike
SeqFuzzSDN, FuzzSDN𝐸 , Delta𝐸 , and Beads𝐸 do not leverage the generated EFSM to guide their
fuzzing operations.
   We use two synthetic systems, each with a single switch, controlled by either ONOS or RYU. We
leverage a test procedure (see Section 3) that specifies a pairwise ping test [12], which has been used
in many SDN studies [26, 40, 50, 58, 62]. This test procedure is important as it enables practitioners
to verify communication between hosts, measure latency, detect packet loss, and identify routing
issues. For the failure detection mechanism, we identify spurious switch disconnections. In our
experiments, we identify switch disconnections that lead to communication breakdowns as failures.
These failures cannot be localised using stack traces to pinpoint the causes of the failures.
   In our comparison, we count the number of failures observed during the execution of SeqFuzzSDN
and the baselines. In addition, from the final EFSMs inferred by the four tools, we measure the
number of unique loop-free paths (corresponding to message sequences) that lead to failures. This
allows us to assess how many distinct failure-inducing sequences of state changes are captured in
the EFSMs. To further compare the four tools, we analyse the sensitivity of each EFSM, calculated
using the formula:

                                                              #accepted
                                         sensitivity =
                                                         #accepted + #rejected

where #accepted and #rejected are the number of traces accepted and rejected by the EFSM,
respectively. In our context, an EFSM with high sensitivity is desirable as it is less likely to miss
possible failure-inducing sequences of control messages. To fairly calculate sensitivity, we elected
to create a dataset that maintains a balanced representation of success and failure traces across all
tools, thereby reducing potential biases toward a specific tool. To do so, we created a test dataset
containing 800 fuzzing results, with an equal split of 400 success traces and 400 failure traces. These
fuzzing results were randomly sampled from separate runs of SeqFuzzSDN, FuzzSDN, Delta, and
Beads, with each tool contributing 200 results, evenly divided into 100 success traces and 100 failure
traces. We note that other commonly used evaluation metrics, such as precision and F1-score, are
not applicable in our context because an EFSM is built from fuzzed message sequences that are
not generated during normal operations of the SDN controller under test. Hence, our datasets lack
negative traces—message sequences that should not be produced by the SDN controller—since
they are derived from fuzzed message sequences, making it impossible to compute precision and
F1-score.
   Additionally, we measure the diversity of fuzzed message sequences obtained from the four
tools using the Normalised Compression Distance (NCD) for multisets [19]. Recall from Section 3
that the fuzzed message sequences vary in length, message types, and message values, making
the application of simple sequence comparison metrics difficult. In our context, a high NCD
value indicates that the fuzzed sequences of control messages (i.e., tests) are diverse, reducing the
likelihood of redundancy or overly similar tests.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                      27


EXP2. To answer RQ2, we compare SeqFuzzSDN to its variant, named SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 . At each
learning step, instead of using the sampling technique (see Algorithm 3), SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 uses all
the collected event traces to infer an EFSM.
   In this experiment, we use the same synthetic systems as those used in EXP1. Our test procedure
specifies a pairwise ping test, and our failure detection mechanism identifies unexpected communi-
cation breakdowns. This experiment counts the number of iterations of the fuzzing, learning, and
planning steps within the time budget and measures the execution time of each step. In addition, we
compare SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 by measuring the sensitivity of the final EFSMs obtained
after the time budget expires. To ensure fair comparisons between SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 ,
we created a test dataset comprising 1000 fuzzing results, evenly split into 500 success traces and
500 failure traces. These results were obtained from separate runs of SeqFuzzSDN, SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 ,
FuzzSDN𝐸 , Delta𝐸 , and Beads𝐸 , with each method contributing 200 results, evenly split into 100
success traces and 100 failure traces. Therefore, this test dataset is not biased toward either SeqFuz-
zSDN or SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 . Furthermore, we measure the coverage and diversity degrees (defined
in Section 3.4.2) of the planned paths (corresponding to message sequences) obtained at the last
iteration, allowing us to assess the effectiveness of the EFSMs in generating message sequences
that cover diverse states.
EXP3. To answer RQ3, we investigate the correlation between the resource consumption of
SeqFuzzSDN and the size of the five synthetic systems described in Section 4.3, each with 1, 2, 4, 8,
and 16 switches, controlled by either ONOS or RYU. For this experiment, we use a test procedure
that implements the pairwise ping test, similar to EXP1 and EXP2. Compared to EXP1 and EXP2,
the sequences of control messages produced by the test procedure in EXP3 differ significantly in
terms of their lengths. This is due to the fully connected topology in EXP3, which includes multiple
switches. Moreover, when there are more than two switches, the topology introduces switching
loops [65], further increasing the number of events in a trace. We measure the time required to
configure Mininet and the SDN controller, perform the test procedure, and execute each step of
SeqFuzzSDN (i.e., fuzzing, learning, and planning).

4.5   Parameter Setting
As described in Section 3, SeqFuzzSDN takes as input parameters that can be tuned to improve its
efficiency and effectiveness. For clarity and reproducibility, this section provides all the parameter
values and describes how we set them. We note that, given the extremely long execution time
required for applying automated hyperparameter optimisation techniques in our context, we
manually set some of the parameters as described below.
   In the learning step, the parameters to be tuned are those of the sampling technique (Algorithm 3)
and Mint [82]. For the sampling technique, we set the number (𝑛𝑡𝑠 ) of event traces to 1000, limiting
the maximum size of the dataset used by Mint. This configuration allowed SeqFuzzSDN to generate
EFSMs in practical time (approximately 100 minutes). For Mint, we configured the parameter
values of RIPPER [20] as follows: three folds, a minimal weight of 2.0, and two optimisation runs as
specified by the default setting in WEKA [85].
   In the planning step, we set the size of a candidate solution (𝑛𝑠 ) to 200 in order to match the
number of test procedure executions to be performed in each iteration of SeqFuzzSDN. This ensures
that a candidate solution contains the 200 traces to be followed during the 200 executions of the
test procedure. We set the candidate solution fuzzing probability (𝜇 𝑓 ) to 0.5, as we want to strike a
balance between exploitation and exploration of the generated EFSM. The crossover probability
(𝜇𝑐 ) and the mutation probability (𝜇𝑚 ) in the planning step were set to 0.8 and 0.02, respectively,
following published guidelines. The size of the population and archive, 𝑛𝑝 , is set to 100 and the

                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
  28                                                             Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


                    SeqFuzzSDN          FuzzSDNE            BEADSE               DELTAE                combined
             100%
SeqFuzzSDN



              75%
              50%
              25%
               0%
             100%
FuzzSDNE




              75%
              50%
              25%
               0%
             100%
              75%
BEADSE




              50%
              25%
               0%
             100%
              75%
DELTAE




              50%
              25%
               0%
                    S+F     F          S+F         F       S+F       F         S+F        F           S+F        F

  Fig. 7. Comparing the sensitivity of the EFSMs generated by SeqFuzzSDN, FuzzSDN𝐸 , Beads𝐸 , and Delta𝐸 ,
  the five plots in each row display the sensitivity of the corresponding tool. The first four columns represent
  the sensitivity of the EFSMs assessed using the test dataset containing message sequences generated by
  each tool. Sensitivity is assessed using message sequences that lead to both success and failure, denoted by
  (S+F), and only failure, denoted by (F). The last column represents the sensitivity assessed using all datasets
  generated by the four tools. The boxplots (25%-50%-75%) show the distribution of sensitivity over 10 runs of
  each tool.


  search generates 50 populations, allowing the planning step to complete within a reasonable time
  (on average, 79 minutes for our ONOS study subject, and 44 minutes for our RYU study subject).
     The remaining parameters were tuned using hyperparameter optimisation [85], following guide-
  lines from the literature [39, 85]. We evaluated 10 different configurations of SeqFuzzSDN using grid
  search [85]. As a result of this optimisation process, we set the remaining parameters as follows:
  the initial fuzzing probability (𝜇) of a message is 0.3, the minimum merging score (𝑘) of Mint is 1,
  and the number (𝑛𝑘 ) of shortest paths used during the generation of a candidate solution is 15.
     The parameters of SeqFuzzSDN used in our experiments could be further refined to improve
  efficiency and effectiveness. However, the configuration we chose produced results that are satis-
  factory to support our findings. As a result, we have not included additional experiments aimed at
  optimising these parameters in this article.

  4.6          Experiment Results
  To answer the research questions, we assessed the results obtained from both the ONOS and RYU
  subjects. Since the findings from the ONOS results are consistent with those from the RYU results,
  this section presents only the ONOS results for brevity. Note that the results for our RYU study
  subject are presented in Appendix A.
  RQ1. Figure 7 compares the sensitivity of the EFSMs measured using the test dataset, which
  contains message sequences and their test results obtained from the four tools: SeqFuzzSDN,

  , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                      29


FuzzSDN𝐸 , Beads𝐸 , and Delta𝐸 . The last column of the first row in the figure shows that, when
evaluating all the message sequences produced by these tools, on average, SeqFuzzSDN achieves a
sensitivity of 49.89% on the message sequences leading to both success and failure (referred to as
the combined S+F dataset) and 60.19% on the message sequences leading only to failure (referred
to as the combined F dataset). For brevity, we refer to datasets containing message sequences
generated by each tool that result in both success and failure as the [tool] S+F dataset and those
that result only in failure as the [tool] F dataset. Specifically, as shown in the first row of the figure,
SeqFuzzSDN achieves, on average, a sensitivity of 67.1% on the SeqFuzzSDN S+F dataset and 92.3%
on the SeqFuzzSDN F dataset, 0.23% on the FuzzSDN𝐸 S+F dataset and 0.00% on the FuzzSDN𝐸 F
dataset, 71.27% on the Beads𝐸 S+F dataset and 86.88% on the Beads𝐸 F dataset, and 73.30% on the
Delta𝐸 S+F dataset and 89.59% on the Delta𝐸 F dataset.
   For FuzzSDN𝐸 , Beads𝐸 , and Delta𝐸 , respectively, the figure (the last column of the 2nd, 3rd,
and 4th rows) shows that their EFSMs’ sensitivities are, on average, 22.06%, 14.40%, and 9.38% on
the combined S+F dataset, and 25.00%, 4.53%, and 12.25% on the combined F dataset. Specifically,
as shown in the first column of the figure, starting from the 2nd row, using the SeqFuzzSDN S+F
dataset (and the SeqFuzzSDN F dataset), FuzzSDN𝐸 , Beads𝐸 , and Delta𝐸 achieve, respectively,
on average, sensitivities of 0.84%, 4.78%, and 3.68% (and 0.0%, 0.0%, and 4.55%). Regarding the
FuzzSDN𝐸 S+F dataset (and the FuzzSDN𝐸 F dataset), as shown in the 2nd column of the figure,
FuzzSDN𝐸 , Beads𝐸 , and Delta𝐸 achieve, respectively, on average, sensitivities of 54.62%, 1.35%,
and 0.00% (and 66.39%, 0.00%, and 0.00%). For the Beads𝐸 S+F dataset (and the Beads𝐸 F dataset),
shown in the 3rd column, these three baselines achieve, respectively, on average, sensitivities of
0.00%, 6.37%, and 5.75% (and 0.00%, 0.00%, and 4.28%). Lastly, when using the Delta𝐸 S+F dataset
(and the Delta𝐸 F dataset), these baselines achieve, respectively, on average, sensitivities of 0.00%,
5.64%, and 8.69% (and 0.00%, 0.00%, and 4.01%).
   These results show that SeqFuzzSDN achieves, on average, a higher sensitivity compared to the
baselines, and the differences are statistically significant. However, note that the EFSM produced by
SeqFuzzSDN rejects most of the failure-inducing message sequences obtained from FuzzSDN𝐸 , as
SeqFuzzSDN and FuzzSDN𝐸 use significantly different fuzzing methods. While FuzzSDN𝐸 fuzzes a
single message by modifying its fields’ values, SeqFuzzSDN fuzzes a sequence of messages using
multiple fuzz operators (i.e., delay, modification, duplication, deletion, and insertion). Consequently,
the message sequences that lead to failure are significantly different between the two tools, resulting
in producing very different EFSMs, which cannot accept the message sequences generated by the
other tool. Even when the same failures are triggered, the generated traces differ due to these
distinct paths. However, recall that the EFSM produced by FuzzSDN𝐸 rejects most of the message
sequences generated by SeqFuzzSDN, Beads𝐸 , and Delta𝐸 , indicating that the EFSMs are specific
only to FuzzSDN𝐸 .
   Figure 8 compares (a) the NCD scores of the message sequences, (b) the number of unique
failure-inducing paths in the EFSMs, and (c) the number of message sequences leading to failure,
which are obtained from 10 runs of SeqFuzzSDN, FuzzSDN𝐸 , Beads𝐸 , and Delta𝐸 . Figure 8a shows
that SeqFuzzSDN achieves a higher NCD score, with an average of 0.99, compared to those of the
baselines. Figure 8b shows that, on average, SeqFuzzSDN was able to infer an EFSM containing
18 unique loop-free paths that lead to failure, which is significantly higher than the others. From
these results, we found that SeqFuzzSDN generates more diverse sequences of control messages
that exercise a larger number of state changes compared to the baselines.
   However, Figure 8c shows that FuzzSDN𝐸 generates a larger number of message sequences (an
average of 265) leading to failure compared to the other tools, while SeqFuzzSDN generates, on
average, 140 message sequences leading to failure, thus outperforming Beads𝐸 and Delta𝐸 . Even
though FuzzSDN𝐸 outperforms SeqFuzzSDN in terms of number of failures, recall from Figure 8a

                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
30                                                                                                                    Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand

            1.00
                                                                                                                                                     400
            0.99                                                                           20                                                        350




                                                         # unique failure-inducing paths
            0.98                                                                                                                                     300
                                                                                           15
NCD Score




                                                                                                                                                     250




                                                                                                                                        # failures
            0.97
                                                                                                                                                     200
                                                                                           10
            0.96                                                                                                                                     150

                                                                                            5                                                        100
            0.95
                                                                                                                                                      50

            0.94                                                                            0                                                          0
                   SeqFuzzSDN FuzzSDNE BEADSE   DELTAE                                          SeqFuzzSDN FuzzSDNE   BEADSE   DELTAE                      SeqFuzzSDN FuzzSDNE   BEADSE   DELTAE

                        (a) NCD scores                       (b) Number of unique failure paths                                                              (c) Number of failures

Fig. 8. Comparing (a) the NCD scores of the message sequences, (b) the number of unique failure-inducing
paths in the EFSMs, and (c) the number of message sequences leading to failure, all obtained from SeqFuzzSDN,
FuzzSDN𝐸 , Beads𝐸 , and Delta𝐸 . The boxplots (25%-50%-75%) show the distribution of each metric over 10
runs of each tool.

Table 3. Failure-inducing message sequences discovered by SeqFuzzSDN in EXP1 and whether they were
found by existing tools: FuzzSDN and Beads.

     ID                Failure-inducing message sequences                                                                                                                FuzzSDN          Beads
     ID1               Modification of FEATURE_REQUEST or FEATURE_REPLY                                                                                                      Yes           Yes
     ID2               Modification of *_STATS_REPLY of *_STATS_REQUEST                                                                                                      No            Yes
     ID3               Removal of a non-existing flow                                                                                                                        No            No
     ID4               Insertion of PACKET_IN after DESC_STATS_REPLY                                                                                                         No            No
     ID5               Duplication of ERROR after GET_CONFIG_REQUEST                                                                                                         No            No
     ID6               Deletion of GET_CONFIG_REPLY                                                                                                                          No            No
     ID7               Insertion of PACKET_IN after a flow removed                                                                                                           No            No
     ID8               Modification of BARRIER_REQUEST or BARRIER_REPLY                                                                                                      Yes           Yes
     ID9               Modification of ECHO_REQUEST or ECHO_REPLY                                                                                                            Yes           No
     ID10              Insertion of PACKET_IN after deletion of PORT_STATS_REQUEST                                                                                           No            No
     ID11              Insertion of PACKET_IN after BARRIER_REPLY                                                                                                            No            No
     ID12              Duplication of handshake messages                                                                                                                     No            Yes
     ID13              Delay or deletion of *_STATS_REQUEST of *_STATS_REPLY                                                                                                 No            No
     ID14              Duplication of FLOW_MOD                                                                                                                               No            No


and Figure 8b that FuzzSDN𝐸 generates message sequences that are less diverse and exercise
significantly fewer number of state changes compared to SeqFuzzSDN. Furthermore, as described
in Section 3, SeqFuzzSDN aims to generate a balanced number of message sequences that lead to
success and failure, rather than focusing solely on the latter.
   In addition to the metric-based comparison described above, we reviewed the failure-inducing
message sequences produced by SeqFuzzSDN in EXP1 and assessed whether SeqFuzzSDN could
discover new failure-inducing sequences compared to existing studies. Specifically, we manually
inspected the failure-inducing sequences obtained from five runs of EXP1 (approximately 800
sequences) and categorised them based on their unique characteristics that contribute to failures
into 14 cases. Table 3 presents these 14 cases of failure-inducing message sequences generated

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                           31

                                                  35

                                                  30

                                                  25
                           Number of iterations
                                                  20

                                                  15

                                                  10

                                                   5

                                                   0   SeqFuzzSDN   SeqFuzzSDNNS

Fig. 9. Comparing the number of iterations completed by SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 within a 5-day
time budget. The boxplots (25%-50%-75%) show the distribution of iteration counts over 10 runs of each tool.


by SeqFuzzSDN in EXP1, comparing them with those reported by FuzzSDN and Beads. The first
column represents the class ID, the second column describes the characteristics of failure-inducing
message sequences, and the third and fourth columns indicate whether or not the corresponding
sequence class was identified by FuzzSDN and Beads, respectively. For example, class ID1 refers
to message sequences that modify the FEATURE_REQUEST or FEATURE_REPLY messages. For
ID1, both FuzzSDN and Beads were able to discover the failure-inducing case. As another example,
class ID10 refers to message sequences that insert the PACKET_IN message after deleting the
PORT_STATS_REQUEST message. In contrast to ID1, neither FuzzSDN nor Beads were able to
discover this failure-inducing case. As shown in the table, ID1 and ID8 were reported in both
FuzzSDN and Beads. ID2 and ID12 were reported in Beads but not in FuzzSDN. ID9 was reported
in FuzzSDN but not in Beads. IDs 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 13, and 14 were not reported in either
FuzzSDN or Beads. Hence, the results show that SeqFuzzSDN is effective in identifying new types
of failure-inducing message sequences compared to prior work.

 The answer to RQ1 is that SeqFuzzSDN significantly outperforms the baselines that extend
 FuzzSDN, Beads, and Delta. In particular, our experiment results indicate that SeqFuzzSDN
 can generate more diverse sequences of control messages leading to failure than those obtained
 from the baselines, while also providing EFSMs that accurately capture failure-inducing message
 sequences.

RQ2. Figure 9 presents a comparison of the number of iterations for the fuzzing, learning, and
planning steps completed by SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 within a time budget of 5 days.
The boxplots show the distributions (25%-50%-75% quantiles) of the number iterations performed
by SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 , obtained from 10 runs of EXP2. As shown in the figure,
SeqFuzzSDN can execute significantly more iterations than SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 . For a time budget
of 5 days, SeqFuzzSDN completes, on average, 25 iterations, while SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 completes
approximately 15 iterations. This result indicates that the sampling technique, which caps the

                                                                    , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
    32                                                            Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


                                  SeqFuzzSDN                                          SeqFuzzSDNNS
                 1000                                             1000
                         Fuzzing step                                        Fuzzing step
                  900    Learning step                             900       Learning step
                         Planning step                                       Planning step
                  800                                              800
                  700                                              700
Time (minutes)




                  600                                              600
                  500                                              500
                  400                                              400
                  300                                              300
                  200                                              200
                  100                                              100
                    00    5       10         15        20    25      00        5        10       15       20        25
                                    Iteration                                            Iteration
    Fig. 10. Comparing the execution time per iteration for the fuzzing, learning, and planning steps of SeqFuz-
    zSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 within a 5-day time budget. The execution times shown in this figure are the
    average values observed over 10 runs of EXP2.


    maximum size of the dataset for Mint, allows SeqFuzzSDN to complete more iterations within the
    same time frame. In contrast, SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 , which permits the dataset to grow continuously over
    iterations, completes fewer iterations. Note that each iteration of SeqFuzzSDN (and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 )
    tests the SDN controller 200 times; hence, the sampling technique enables SeqFuzzSDN to test the
    SDN controller, on average, 1000 times more than SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 .
       In addition, Figure 10 compares SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 with regard to the execution
    times per iteration for the fuzzing, learning, and planning steps over a time budget of 5 days. The
    bar graph shows the average execution times taken by SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 for the
    fuzzing, learning, and planning steps at each iteration, based on 10 runs of EXP2.
       The results show that the fuzzing time per iteration remains constant at around 200 minutes for
    both SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 , indicating that the fuzzing step is independent of the tool
    used. Recall from Section 4.4 that EXP2 uses the pairwise ping test procedure, which is executed at
    each iteration during fuzzing and does not introduce variance in execution time over iterations.
    For the planning step, Figure 10 shows that the planning time does not exceed 150 minutes in
    both SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 . Figure 10 also suggests that, for SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 , the time
    required to learn an EFSM increases exponentially with each iteration due to the growing size of
    the dataset fed to Mint. Furthermore, we observe that, on the 17th iteration of SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 , the
    learning time reaches the 12-hour timeout limit, thus preventing SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 from completing
    any further iterations. This finding aligns with the literature [30, 74, 83], as inferring EFSMs is a
    complex problem that scales poorly with larger input sizes. In contrast, the results for SeqFuzzSDN
    indicate that the time required for inferring an EFSM (i.e., the learning step) remains below 115
    minutes due to the application of the sampling technique. Thus, based on the results shown in

    , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                      33


Table 4. Statistical significance analysis using the Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test for sensitivity, diversity, and
coverage results obtained from 10 runs of EXP2.

 Metric               Average                  Average                p-value                   Statistical
                   (SeqFuzzSDN)            (SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 )                                    Significance
                                                                                                (𝛼 = 0.05)
 Sensitivity           0.542                     0.529                0.571                  Not Significant
 Diversity             0.9925                    0.9920               0.297                  Not Significant
 Coverage              0.5533                    0.6599               0.0124                  Significant



Figure 10, we can further conclude that applying the sampling technique enables SeqFuzzSDN to
overcome the scalability issues associated with the complexity of learning EFSMs.
   Furthermore, Table 4 presents the statistical test results for the distributions of sensitivity,
diversity, and coverage (described in Section 3) achieved by SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 after
10 runs of EXP2, using the Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test [38] with an 𝛼 value of 0.05. On average,
SeqFuzzSDN (resp. SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 ) achieves a sensitivity of 54.2% (resp. 52.9%), a diversity of 0.9925
(resp. 0.9920), and a coverage of 0.5533 (resp. 0.6599). We observed that the differences in sensitivity
(𝑝 = 0.14) and diversity (𝑝 = 0.9) are not significant, while the difference in coverage (𝑝 = 0.01)
is. The results indicate that the use of the sampling technique does not negatively impact the
sensitivity of the generated EFSMs nor the diversity of the generated message sequences. However,
the coverage achieved by SeqFuzzSDN has significantly improved, suggesting that the states in the
EFSM are explored more thoroughly. One possible explanation for the improved coverage is that
the increased number of iterations gives SeqFuzzSDN more opportunities to refine EFSMs with
respect to the coverage objective targeted at the planning step.

 The answer to RQ2 is that the sampling technique introduced in SeqFuzzSDN reduces its
 computation cost, allowing for more iterations to be performed within a given time budget. This
 helps overcome scalability issues in inferring EFSMs without compromising the accuracy of
 the EFSMs and the diversity of the generated message sequences. Additionally, the sampling
 technique significantly improves SeqFuzzSDN’s coverage, leading to a more thorough exploration
 of the search space.

RQ3. Figure 11 presents the distributions of execution times (25%-50%-75% boxplots) for the fuzzing,
learning, and planning steps of SeqFuzzSDN. These execution times were measured using the five
study subjects in EXP3, which consist of 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 switches controlled by ONOS. As shown in
Figure 11, the execution time taken for the fuzzing step is, on average, 203 minutes for the 1-switch
configuration, 215 minutes for 2 switches, 235 minutes for 4 switches, 257 minutes for 8 switches,
and 274 minutes for 16 switches. The learning step took, on average, 15 minutes for the 1-switch
configuration, 14 minutes for 2 switches, 11 minutes for 4 switches, 25 minutes for 8 switches,
and 26 minutes for 16 switches. The planning step took, on average, 79 minutes for the 1-switch
configuration, 69 minutes for 2 switches, 56 minutes for 4 switches, 56 minutes for 8 switches, and
76 minutes for 16 switches.
   The results show that there is no significant difference in the times required for the learning and
planning steps across the five study subjects. However, the only time increase occurs during the
fuzzing step, where test procedures are executed. This includes the time required to configure and
teardown Mininet and the SDN controller. This increasing trend aligns with our expectations, as
the execution time for a test procedure increases with its complexity. As described in Section 4.4,

                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
    34                                                                    Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand

                                Fuzzing Step                        Learning Step                      Planning Step
                 300                                                                Learning Step                      Planning Step

                 250

                 200
Time (minutes)




                 150

                 100

                  50
                                     Fuzzing Step + Configuration
                                     Fuzzing Step
                   0 1 SW 2 SW 4 SW 8 SW 16 SW 1 SW 2 SW 4 SW 8 SW 16 SW 1 SW 2 SW 4 SW 8 SW 16 SW

   Fig. 11. Boxplots (25%-50%-75%) representing the distributions of time taken in minutes for the fuzzing, learn-
   ing, and planning steps of SeqFuzzSDN. This figure includes the times observed over 10 runs of SeqFuzzSDN
   with 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 switch configurations.



    this is primarily due to the increasing number of messages exchanged between the switches and
    the controller as the number of switches and their connections grows [65]. This increase in time is
    independent of SeqFuzzSDN, as it solely depends on the complexity of the test procedures executed.
    Note that when 16 switches are fully connected, the pairwise ping test procedure produces, on
    average, 30.73 control messages (min: 1, max: 8178). With 8 switches, the average number of control
    messages decreases to 25.19 (min: 1, max: 4863), while 4 switches produce an average of 16.16
    control messages (min: 1, max: 1004). When only 2 switches are connected, the test procedure
    generates, on average, 12.83 control messages (min: 1, max: 86), and with just 1 switch, the average
    is further reduced to 10.46 control messages (min: 1, max: 85). The pairwise ping test procedure
    produces 35 unique types of control messages. However, SeqFuzzSDN halts the execution of the
    test procedure upon detecting a failure. As a result, the total number of control messages recorded
    in our experiments could be lower than 35, depending on when failures occur.

           The answer to RQ3 is that the primary factor affecting the execution time of SeqFuzzSDN is
           its fuzzing time, which is influenced by the number of control messages generated by a test
           procedure. Consequently, SeqFuzzSDN is applicable to complex systems with large networks,
           provided that the execution time of a test procedure remains within an acceptable time budget.

    4.7                Threats to Validity
   To address potential threats to internal validity, we compared SeqFuzzSDN against three SOTA
   tools (Delta, Beads, and FuzzSDN), which have been used to generate failure-inducing control
   messages for testing SDN controllers. However, Delta, Beads, and FuzzSDN do not generate
   failure-inducing models that consider the sequences of messages exchanged between the controller
   and switches. Consequently, we extended these tools as baselines to produce EFSMs, allowing for a
   comparative analysis between SeqFuzzSDN and these baselines.
      The principal external validity threat to SeqFuzzSDN is the risk that it may not be applicable to
   different contexts, such as other SDN systems with different switch configurations or controllers.
   To address this potential threat, we conducted experiments with SeqFuzzSDN against multiple
   SDNs and two popular SDN controllers found in the literature, namely ONOS and RYU. We varied

    , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                      35


our synthetic systems, which comprise five networks with 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 switches, respectively,
managed by either ONOS or RYU.
   Additionally, the prototype implementation of SeqFuzzSDN is compatible with OpenFlow, a
widely accepted standard protocol for SDNs, which has been used in numerous SDN studies and
practices [40, 49–51, 58, 77]. As a consequence, we were able to successfully apply SeqFuzzSDN to
real-world SDN controllers (ONOS and RYU) and compare it to existing tools (i.e., Delta, Beads, and
FuzzSDN), considering their support for OpenFlow. However, to further explore the applicability
of our findings, it is essential to conduct additional case studies in various settings. This includes
industrial systems that use different SDN protocols and user studies that involve practitioners.

5   Discussion
In this section, we discuss the primary challenges faced by SeqFuzzSDN and considerations for
further improvement, including testing time, testing scope, information loss due to sampling,
and generalisation to other controllers. In addition, we provide practical guidance on adapting
SeqFuzzSDN for other systems
    Testing time. SeqFuzzSDN executes an SDN controller for testing, which requires initialisation of
the controller, network simulation, and teardown overhead. These required operations are essential
for testing the SDN controller in a realistic context. However, further research on optimising these
operations, such as reducing initialisation and teardown times and developing lightweight network
simulations, is needed to enhance efficiency and scalability.
    Testing scope. SeqFuzzSDN takes as input a test procedure and a failure detection mechanism.
Hence, the testing scope is limited by these inputs. For example, a pairwise ping test is unlikely to
exercise components of the controller responsible for handling backup functionality. Automatically
exploring possible use scenarios (i.e., test procedures) and defining corresponding test oracles
(i.e., failure detection mechanisms) help engineers reduce their manual efforts in creating them.
However, efficiently and effectively exploring the space of test procedures and defining oracles
remain hard problems.
    Information loss. SeqFuzzSDN employs a sampling technique to use MINT, a model inference
tool, in a scalable manner. However, sampling sequences from all recorded message sequences
inherently leads to information loss, even if our approach attempts to minimise such loss, as
described in Section 3.3.3. To fully address this issue, it is highly desirable to develop a scalable
model inference technique capable of handling large volumes of message sequences.
    Application to other systems. Although SeqFuzzSDN was evaluated with existing fuzzing
tools and SDN controllers that rely on OpenFlow, it may also be applied to other SDN controllers
or even other network systems. To facilitate such use cases, we provide practical guidance on
applying and adapting SeqFuzzSDN to other systems. First, to utilise SeqFuzzSDN with systems
that incorporate other SDN protocols, such as Cisco OpFlex [78] and ForCES [36], it is necessary
to modify the sniffing and injection mechanisms of SeqFuzzSDN to decode and encode control
messages. However, these modifications do not affect the fuzzing, learning, and planning steps.
Therefore, we anticipate that, although such modification necessitates engineering effort to revise
the sniffing and injection mechanisms, they are unlikely to impact SeqFuzzSDN’s efficiency and
effectiveness. Second, SeqFuzzSDN may also inspire applications for testing network servers. In
such use cases, adapting SeqFuzzSDN will require modifying components related to SDNs, such as
parsing and modifying control messages and simulating SDN communications. In addition, recall
from Section 3 that SeqFuzzSDN uses message fields to define EFSM guards and to fuzz messages.
This implies that SeqFuzzSDN is applicable only to network systems where the structure of message
fields is known.

                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
36                                                       Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


6    Related Works
In this section, we discuss related works in the areas of SDN testing, fuzzing, and characterising
failure-inducing inputs. Readers familiar with our previous work [62] may notice significant
similarities. This is because this work builds upon, and extends our previous research. As such,
much of the foundational literature and related work remain relevant and are thus referenced here.
We believe this will provide a comprehensive context for both new readers and those familiar with
our prior work.
SDN testing. The study of SDN testing in the networking literature focuses on various objectives,
such as detecting security vulnerabilities and attacks [4, 10, 17, 40, 50, 59, 89], identifying incon-
sistencies among the SDN components (i.e., applications, controllers, and switches) [49, 52, 77],
and analysing SDN executions [29, 58, 79]. In this discussion, we focus on SDN testing methods
that utilise fuzzing, as they are the most relevant to our research. Lee et al. [48, 49] proposed
AudiSDN, a framework that employs a fuzzing technique to detect policy inconsistencies among
SDN components (i.e., controllers and switches). AudiSDN relies on the fuzzing of network policies
configured by the administrators through the REST APIs of the SDN components. To increase
the probability of uncovering inconsistencies, AudiSDN restricts valid relationship elements by
building rule dependency trees from the specification of the OpenFlow protocol. RE-CHECKER,
proposed by Woo et al. [86], is designed to fuzz the RESTful services offered by SDN controllers. It
fuzzes an input file in JSON format, which is used by a network administrator to define network
policies, such as data forwarding rules. This process generates a large number of malformed REST
messages for testing RESTful services in SDN. Dixit et al. [27] introduced AIM-SDN to test the
implementation of the Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA) in SDN. AIM-SDN
uses random fuzzing of REST messages to test the NMDA implementation in SDN, focusing on the
availability, integrity, and confidentiality of datastores. Shukla et al. [77] created PAZZ, which is
designed to identify faults in SDN switches by fuzzing data packet headers, such as IPv4 and IPv6
headers. Finally, Albab et al. [2] introduced SwitchV to verify the behaviours of SDN switches.
SwitchV employs fuzzing and symbolic execution to analyse the p4 models that define the be-
haviours of SDN switches. In contrast to these methods, SeqFuzzSDN fuzzes SDN control messages
to test SDN controllers, similar to Delta, Beads, and FuzzSDN. Furthermore, SeqFuzzSDN uses
learned EFSMs to guide the fuzzing process and characterise the messages sequences that may lead
to a system failure.
Fuzzing and Stateful Testing. To efficiently generate effective test data, fuzzing has been widely
applied in many application domains [57]. The research strands that most closely relate to ours
are stateful fuzzing techniques [5, 33, 60, 66]. Numerous research studies have explored the use
of FSMs for testing complex systems. Gascon et al. [33] proposed Pulsar, a stateful black-box
fuzzing technique aimed at discovering vulnerabilities in proprietary network protocols. Their
proposed approach involves the inference of a Markov model from network traces, which are
used to generate test cases using fuzzing primitives (i.e., paths in the Markov model), and finally
the selection of the test cases that maximise the coverage of the protocol stack. Pham et al. [66]
proposed AFLNet, a grey-box fuzzer for network protocols implementation, based on AFL [87].
Their proposed technique takes a mutational approach and states feedback to guide the fuzzing of
network-enabled servers. AFLNet takes as input a corpus of server-client network interactions and
subsequently acts as a client. It replays modified versions of the initial message sequence sent to the
server, preserving only the alterations that successfully expanded the coverage of the code or state
space. From the newly discovered message sequences, AFLNet uses the server’s response codes to
build an FSM that describes the protocol states. From those inferred FSMs, their approach identifies
regions in the state space that have been the least explored and systematically steers the fuzzing


, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                      37


process towards the test of such regions. Natella [60] proposed StateAFL, a grey-box fuzzing
techniques that infers FSMs based on the in-memory states of a server, leveraging compile-time
instrumentation and fuzzy hashing techniques; hence, it does not require response codes. During
the fuzzing process, StateAFL guides the generation of new inputs to the server based on the
inferred FSMs. It employs both byte-level and message-level fuzz operators, which do not rely
on protocol specifications. Kim et al. [42] proposed Ambusher, a protocol-state-aware fuzzing
technique for testing the “East-West” protocol of distributed SDN controllers. Ambusher takes as
input a test configuration which includes the alphabet of the protocol used as well as the cluster
information. In its first phase, Ambusher uses a dummy network node to generate queries between
the controllers, and a dummy controller to log such queries generated in the network. In its second
phase, the logged cluster queries are then used by a FSM learner to infer a FSM of the cluster’s
protocol. In its third phase, Ambusher explores the inferred FSM to extract message sequences.
Those message sequences are then used as seeds for the fuzzing process, in which attack scenarios
are generated by randomising the message sequences. In its final phase, Ambusher leverages the
randomised sequences to test the cluster “East-West” interfaces. Among these, Ambusher is the
most relevant to SeqFuzzSDN, as both take into account the SDN architecture, which differs from
the server-client architecture. Compared to Ambusher, SeqFuzzSDN fuzzes and infers EFSMs based
on sequences of control messages exchanged through the control channel of the SDN (i.e., “South”
interface). To our knowledge, SeqFuzzSDN is the first SDN testing method that focuses on the
“South” interface of SDN controllers while accounting for the statefulness of SDNs.
Characterising Failure-Inducing Inputs. Recently, several research efforts have focused on
identifying the input conditions that cause a system under test to fail [34, 41]. Gopinath et al.
[34] introduced DDTEST, which abstracts inputs that lead to failures. DDTEST is designed to
test software programs, such as JavaScript translators and command-line utilities, that accept
string inputs. It uses a derivation tree to represent how failure-inducing strings are generated.
Kampmann et al. [41] developed ALHAZEN, which identifies the conditions under which software
programs fail. ALHAZEN also targets software that processes strings and uses machine learning
to learn failure-inducing conditions in the form of decision trees. In the domain of SDN systems,
Ollando et al. [62] introduced FuzzSDN, a machine learning-guided Fuzzing method for testing
SDN controllers. FuzzSDN learns an interpretable classification model that characterises conditions
on a control message’s fields under which the controller fails. We note that these methods do not
attempt to create a failure-inducing model for sequential data, which makes those methods not
suitable for our objectives. To our knowledge, SeqFuzzSDN is the first approach that applies an
EFSM-guided fuzzing approach to infer failure-inducing models, in the form of EFSMs, with a focus
on SDNs. Specifically, SeqFuzzSDN tests SDN controllers by accounting for the architecture and
protocols unique to SDNs, which differ from other systems (e.g., server-client systems). Further,
SeqFuzzSDN tests SDN controllers without requiring any modifications or instrumentation of the
controllers or their networks, enabling SDN testing in realistic operational settings.

7   Conclusions
We developed SeqFuzzSDN, a learning-guided fuzzing method for testing stateful SDN controllers.
SeqFuzzSDN uses a fuzzing strategy, guided by EFSMs, in order to (1) efficiently explore the space
of states of the SDN controller under test and (2) infer EFSMs that characterise the sequence of
messages that may make the system fail. SeqFuzzSDN implements an iterative process that fuzzes
sequences of control messages, learns an EFSM, and plans how to guide the subsequent fuzzing
steps by leveraging the learned EFSM. We evaluated SeqFuzzSDN on several synthetic systems
controlled by two different SDN controllers. In addition, we compared SeqFuzzSDN against our
extended versions of three SOTA methods for testing SDN controllers, which served as baselines

                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
38                                                               Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


in our evaluation. Our results show that SeqFuzzSDN significantly outperforms the baselines by
generating effective and diverse tests (i.e., sequences of control messages), that cause the system to
fail, and by producing accurate EFSMs.
    In the future, we will devise a learning technique that will allow SeqFuzzSDN to learn stateful
models (i.e., EFSMs) incrementally, thus addressing scalability issues in inferring EFSMs. To our
knowledge, no existing solution supports incremental EFSM inference in a form applicable to
SeqFuzzSDN. This poses new challenges due to the complexity of continuously updating and
maintaining complex dependencies between states and transitions, without losing any of the
previously learned information. In addition, we will explore model inference techniques that can
capture the asynchronous, distributed, and concurrent nature of an SDN system and apply these
techniques to model SDN behaviours, utilising them to guide testing. Since SDN components
(i.e., hosts, switches, and controllers) are integrated and operate concurrently, leveraging such
techniques will allow us to accurately represent interactions among components and potentially
improve test effectiveness. Further, we also aim to confirm the applicability and effectiveness of
SeqFuzzSDN by testing it on more SDN systems and performing user studies.

Data Availability
Our evaluation package and the SeqFuzzSDN tool can be accessed online [61] to allow researchers
and practitioners to (1) reproduce our experiments and (2) utilize and modify SeqFuzzSDN.

Acknowledgments
This project has received funding from SES and the Luxembourg National Research Fund under
the Industrial Partnership Block Grant (IPBG), ref. IPBG19/14016225/INSTRUCT. Lionel Briand
was partly funded by the Science Foundation Ireland grant 13/RC/2094-2 and NSERC of Canada
under the Discovery and CRC programs. For the purpose of open access, and in fulfilment of
the obligations arising from the grant agreement, the author has applied a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) license to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising
from this submission.

References
 [1] Vangalur S. Alagar and Kasilingam Periyasamy. 2011. Specification of Software Systems. Springer London, Chapter
     Extended Finite State Machine, 105–128.
 [2] Kinan Dak Albab, Jonathan DiLorenzo, Stefan Heule, Ali Kheradmand, Steffen Smolka, Konstantin Weitz, Muhammad
     Timarzi, Jiaqi Gao, and Minlan Yu. 2022. SwitchV: automated SDN switch validation with P4 models. In Proceedings of
     the ACM SIGCOMM 2022 Conference. 365–379.
 [3] Talal Alharbi, Dario Durando, Farzaneh Pakzad, and Marius Portmann. 2016. Securing ARP in Software Defined
     Networks. In Proceedings of the 41st IEEE Conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN’14). 523–526.
 [4] Abdullah M. Alshanqiti, Safi Faizullah, Sarwan Ali, Maria Khalid Alvi, Muhammad Asad Khan, and Imdadullah Khan.
     2019. Detecting DDoS Attack on SDN Due to Vulnerabilities in OpenFlow. In Proceedings of the 2019 International
     Conference on Advances in the Emerging Computing Technologies. 1–6.
 [5] Greg Banks, Marco Cova, Viktoria Felmetsger, Kevin Almeroth, Richard Kemmerer, and Giovanni Vigna. 2006. SNOOZE:
     toward a Stateful NetwOrk prOtocol fuzZEr. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Information Security.
     343–358.
 [6] C.H. Bennett, P. Gacs, Ming Li, P.M.B. Vitanyi, and W.H. Zurek. 1998. Information distance. IEEE Transactions on
     Information Theory 44, 4 (1998), 1407–1423.
 [7] Pankaj Berde, Matteo Gerola, Jonathan Hart, Yuta Higuchi, Masayoshi Kobayashi, Toshio Koide, Bob Lantz, Brian
     O’Connor, Pavlin Radoslavov, William Snow, and Guru Parulkar. 2014. ONOS: Towards an Open, Distributed SDN OS.
     In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Hot topics in Software Defined Networking. 1–6.
 [8] Seifeddine Bettaieb, Seung Yeob Shin, Mehrdad Sabetzadeh, Lionel C. Briand, Michael Garceau, and Antoine Meyers.
     2020. Using machine learning to assist with the selection of security controls during security assessment. Empirical
     Software Engineering 25, 4 (2020), 2550–2582.


, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                              39


 [9] Seifeddine Bettaieb, Seung Yeob Shin, Mehrdad Sabetzadeh, Lionel C. Briand, Grégory Nou, and Michael Garceau. 2019.
     Decision Support for Security-Control Identification Using Machine Learning. In Proceedings of the 25th International
     Working Conference on Requirements Engineering: Foundation for Software Quality, Vol. 11412. 3–20.
[10] Suman Sankar Bhunia and Mohan Gurusamy. 2017. Dynamic attack detection and mitigation in IoT using SDN. In
     Proceedings of the 27th International Telecommunication Networks and Applications Conference. 1–6.
[11] Andreas Blenk, Arsany Basta, Martin Reisslein, and Wolfgang Kellerer. 2016. Survey on Network Virtualization
     Hypervisors for Software Defined Networking. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 18, 1 (2016), 655–685.
[12] Robert T. Braden. 1989. Requirements for Internet Hosts - Communication Layers. Information RFC 1122. Internet
     Engineering Task Force (IETF).
[13] Jürgen Branke, Kalyanmoy Deb, Henning Dierolf, and Matthias Osswald. 2004. Finding Knees in Multi-objective
     Optimization. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature (PPSN’04).
     722–731.
[14] Caius Brindescu, Iftekhar Ahmed, Rafael Leano, and Anita Sarma. 2020. Planning for untangling: Predicting the
     difficulty of merge conflicts. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering. 801–811.
[15] Alessandro Calò, Paolo Arcaini, Shaukat Ali, Florian Hauer, and Fuyuki Ishikawa. 2020. Generating Avoidable Collision
     Scenarios for Testing Autonomous Driving Systems. In Proceeding of the 13th IEEE International Conference on Software
     Testing, Validation and Verification. 375–386.
[16] Tao Chen, Ke Li, Rami Bahsoon, and Xin Yao. 2018. FEMOSAA: Feature-Guided and Knee-Driven Multi-Objective
     Optimization for Self-Adaptive Software. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 27, 2 (2018),
     1–50.
[17] Juan Camilo Correa Chica, Jenny Cuatindioy Imbachi, and Juan Felipe Botero. 2020. Security in SDN: A comprehensive
     survey. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020), 1–23.
[18] R. Cilibrasi and P.M.B. Vitanyi. 2005. Clustering by compression. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 51, 4 (2005),
     1523–1545.
[19] Andrew R. Cohen and Paul M.B. Vitányi. 2015. Normalized Compression Distance of Multisets with Applications.
     IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 37, 8 (2015), 1602–1614.
[20] William W. Cohen. 1995. Fast Effective Rule Induction. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Machine
     Learning. 115–123.
[21] Mauro Conti, Nicola Dragoni, and Viktor Lesyk. 2016. A Survey of Man In The Middle Attacks. IEEE Communications
     Surveys & Tutorials 18, 3 (2016), 2027–2051.
[22] Leonardo de Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. 2008. Z3: An Efficient SMT Solver. In Proceeding of the 14th International
     Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems. 337–340.
[23] Kalyanmoy Deb. 2001. Multi-Objective Optimization using Evolutionary Algorithms. John Wiley & Sons.
[24] Kalyanmoy Deb, Amrit Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan. 2002. A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic
     algorithm: NSGA-II. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 6, 2 (2002), 182–197.
[25] L. Peter Deutsch. 1996. GZIP file format specification version 4.3. Information RFC 1952. Aladdin Enterprises.
[26] Mohan Dhawan, Rishabh Poddar, Kshiteej Mahajan, and Vijay Mann. 2015. SPHINX: Detecting Security Attacks in
     Software-Defined Networks. In Proceedings of the 22nd Network and Distributed System Security Symposium. 1–16.
[27] Vaibhav Hemant Dixit, Adam Doupé, Yan Shoshitaishvili, Ziming Zhao, and Gail-Joon Ahn. 2018. AIM-SDN: Attacking
     Information Mismanagement in SDN-datastores. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
     Communications Security. 664–676.
[28] Dmitry Drutskoy, Eric Keller, and Jennifer Rexford. 2013. Scalable Network Virtualization in Software-Defined
     Networks. IEEE Internet Computing 17 (2013), 20–27.
[29] Ramakrishnan Durairajan, Joel Sommers, and Paul Barford. 2014. Controller-agnostic SDN Debugging. In Proceedings
     of the 10th ACM International on Conference on emerging Networking Experiments and Technologies, Aruna Seneviratne,
     Christophe Diot, Jim Kurose, Augustin Chaintreau, and Luigi Rizzo (Eds.). 227–234.
[30] S. S. Emam and J. Miller. 2018. Inferring Extended Probabilistic Finite-State Automaton Models from Software
     Executions. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 27, 1 (2018), 1–39.
[31] David Eppstein. 1998. Finding the k Shortest Paths. SIAM J. Comput. 28, 2 (1998), 652–673.
[32] Ramon Ferrús, Harilaos Koumaras, Oriol Sallent, George Agapiou, Tinku Rasheed, M-A Kourtis, C Boustie, Patrick
     Gélard, and Toufik Ahmed. 2016. SDN/NFV-enabled satellite communications networks: Opportunities, scenarios and
     challenges. Journal of Physical Communication 18 (2016), 95–112.
[33] Hugo Gascon, Christian Wressnegger, Fabian Yamaguchi, Daniel Arp, and Konrad Rieck. 2015. Pulsar: Stateful
     Black-Box Fuzzing of Proprietary Network Protocols. In Security and Privacy in Communication Networks. 330–347.
[34] Rahul Gopinath, Alexander Kampmann, Nikolas Havrikov, Ezekiel O. Soremekun, and Andreas Zeller. 2020. Abstracting
     failure-inducing inputs. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and
     Analysis. ACM, 237–248.


                                                                       , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
40                                                               Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


[35] Evangelos Haleplidis, Kostas Pentikousis, Spyros G. Denazis, Jamal Hadi Salim, David Meyer, and Odysseas G.
     Koufopavlou. 2015. Software-Defined Networking (SDN): Layers and Architecture Terminology. Information RFC
     7426. Internet Research Task Force (IRTF).
[36] Joel M. Halpern, Robert Haas, Doria Avri, Ligang Dong, Weiming Wang, Hormuzd M. Khosravi, Jamal Hadi Salim, and
     Ram Gopal. 2010. Forwarding and Control Element Separation (ForCES) Protocol Specification. Information RFC 5810.
[37] Fitash Ul Haq, Donghwan Shin, Shiva Nejati, and Lionel C. Briand. 2021. Can Offline Testing of Deep Neural Networks
     Replace Their Online Testing? Empirical Software Engineering 26, 90 (2021), 1–30.
[38] Myles Hollander, Douglas A. Wolfe, and Eric Chicken. 2015. Nonparametric Statistical Methods. John Wiley & Sons.
[39] Frank Hutter, Lars Kotthoff, and Joaquin Vanschoren. 2019. Automated Machine Learning: Methods, Systems, Challenges
     (1 ed.). Springer.
[40] Samuel Jero, Xiangyu Bu, Cristina Nita-Rotaru, Hamed Okhravi, Richard Skowyra, and Sonia Fahmy. 2017. BEADS:
     Automated Attack Discovery in OpenFlow-Based SDN Systems. In Proceedings of the 20th International Symposium on
     Research in Attacks, Intrusions, and Defenses. 311–333.
[41] Alexander Kampmann, Nikolas Havrikov, Ezekiel O. Soremekun, and Andreas Zeller. 2020. When does my program do
     this? learning circumstances of software behavior. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint European Software Engineering
     Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. 1228–1239.
[42] Jinwoo Kim, Minjae Seo, Eduard Marin, Seungsoo Lee, Jaehyun Nam, and Seungwon Shin. 2024. Ambusher: Exploring
     the Security of Distributed SDN Controllers Through Protocol State Fuzzing. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics
     and Security 19 (2024), 6264–6279.
[43] A. N. Kolmogorov. 1968. Three approaches to the quantitative definition of information. International Journal of
     Computer Mathematics 2, 1-4 (1968), 157–168.
[44] Bob Lantz, Brandon Heller, and Nick McKeown. 2010. A network in a laptop: rapid prototyping for software-defined
     networks. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks. 1–6.
[45] Jaekwon Lee, Seung Yeob Shin, Lionel C. Briand, and Shiva Nejati. 2024. Probabilistic Safe WCET Estimation for
     Weakly Hard Real-time Systems at Design Stages. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 33, 2
     (2024), 1–34.
[46] Jaekwon Lee, Seung Yeob Shin, Shiva Nejati, and Lionel C. Briand. 2022. Optimal priority assignment for real-time
     systems: a coevolution-based approach. Empirical Software Engineering 27, 6 (2022), 142:1–142:49.
[47] Jaekwon Lee, Seung Yeob Shin, Shiva Nejati, Lionel C. Briand, and Yago Isasi Parache. 2023. Estimating Probabilistic
     Safe WCET Ranges of Real-Time Systems at Design Stages. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology
     32, 2 (2023), 37:1–37:33.
[48] Seungsoo Lee, Seungwon Woo, Jinwoo Kim, Jaehyun Nam, Vinod Yegneswaran, Phillip A. Porras, and Seungwon Shin.
     2022. A Framework for Policy Inconsistency Detection in Software-Defined Networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions on
     Networking 30, 3 (2022), 1410–1423.
[49] Seungsoo Lee, Seungwon Woo, Jinwoo Kim, Vinod Yegneswaran, Phillip A. Porras, and Seungwon Shin. 2020. AudiSDN:
     Automated Detection of Network Policy Inconsistencies in Software-Defined Networks. In Proceedings of the 39th IEEE
     Conference on Computer Communications. 1788–1797.
[50] Seungsoo Lee, Changhoon Yoon, Chanhee Lee, Seungwon Shin, Vinod Yegneswaran, and Phillip Porras. 2017. DELTA:
     A Security Assessment Framework for Software-Defined Networks. In Proceedings of the 24th Network and Distributed
     System Security Symposium. 1–15.
[51] Yahui Li, Zhiliang Wang, Jiangyuan Yao, Xia Yin, Xingang Shi, Jianping Wu, and Han Zhang. 2019. MSAID: Automated
     detection of interference in multiple SDN applications. Computer Networks 153 (2019), 49–62.
[52] Yahui Li, Zhiliang Wang, Jiangyuan Yao, Xia Yin, Xingang Shi, Jianping Wu, and Han Zhang. 2019. MSAID: Automated
     detection of interference in multiple SDN applications. Computer Networks 153 (2019), 49–62.
[53] Yuekang Li, Yinxing Xue, Hongxu Chen, Xiuheng Wu, Cen Zhang, Xiaofei Xie, Haijun Wang, and Yang Liu. 2019.
     Cerebro: context-aware adaptive fuzzing for effective vulnerability detection. In Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM
     Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering.
     533—-544.
[54] Jiajia Liu, Yongpeng Shi, Lei Zhao, Yurui Cao, Wen Sun, and Nei Kato. 2018. Joint Placement of Controllers and
     Gateways in SDN-Enabled 5G-Satellite Integrated Network. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 36, 2
     (2018), 221–232.
[55] Ana C. Lorena, Luís P. F. Garcia, Jens Lehmann, Marcilio C. P. Souto, and Tin Kam Ho. 2019. How Complex Is Your
     Classification Problem? A Survey on Measuring Classification Complexity. Comput. Surveys 52, 5 (2019), 107:0–107:34.
[56] Qi Luo, Aswathy Nair, Mark Grechanik, and Denys Poshyvanyk. 2017. FOREPOST: finding performance problems
     automatically with feedback-directed learning software testing. Empirical Software Engineering 22, 1 (2017), 6–56.
[57] Valentin J.M. Manes, HyungSeok Han, Choongwoo Han, Sang Kil Cha, Manuel Egele, Edward J. Schwartz, and Maverick
     Woo. 2021. The Art, Science, and Engineering of Fuzzing: A Survey. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 47


, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                             41


     (2021), 2312–2331. Issue 11.
[58] Canini Marco, Venzano Daniele, Perešíni Peter, Kostić Dejan, and Rexford Jennifer. 2012. A NICE Way to Test OpenFlow
     Applications. In Proceedings of the 9th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation. 127–140.
[59] Saurav Nanda, Faheem Zafari, Casimer DeCusatis, Eric Wedaa, and Baijian Yang. 2016. Predicting network attack
     patterns in SDN using machine learning approach. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Conference on Network Function
     Virtualization and Software Defined Networks. 167–172.
[60] Roberto Natella. 2022. StateAFL: Greybox fuzzing for stateful network servers. Empirical Software Engineering 27, 7
     (2022), 191.
[61] Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand. 2024. [Artifact Repository] Learning-Guided Fuzzing for
     Testing Stateful SDN Controllers. https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.27180477.
[62] Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand. 2024. Learning Failure-Inducing Models for Testing Software-
     Defined Networks. ACM Transaction on Software Engineering and Methodolgies 33, 5 (2024), 113:1–113:25.
[63] Open Networking Foundation. 2015. OpenFlow Switch Specification, Version 1.5.1. Specification ONF TS-025. Open
     Networking Foundation.
[64] Annibale Panichella, Fitsum Meshesha Kifetew, and Paolo Tonella. 2015. Reformulating Branch Coverage as a Many-
     Objective Optimization Problem. In Proceeding the 8th IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Verification
     and Validation (ICST). 1–10.
[65] Larry L Peterson and Bruce S Davie. 2007. Computer Networks: A Systems Approach. Morgan Kaufmann.
[66] Van-Thuan Pham, Marcel Böhme, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2020. AFLNET: A Greybox Fuzzer for Network Protocols.
     In 2020 IEEE 13th International Conference on Software Testing, Validation and Verification (ICST). 460–465.
[67] David C. Plummer. 1982. An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol: Or Converting Network Protocol Addresses to 48.bit
     Ethernet Address for Transmission on Ethernet Hardware. Information. Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).
[68] Jon Postel. 1981. Internet Protocol. Information RFC 791. USC/Information Sciences Institute.
[69] Shisong Qin, Fan Hu, Zheyu Ma, Bodong Zhao, Tingting Yin, and Chao Zhang. 2023. NSFuzz: Towards Efficient
     and State-Aware Network Service Fuzzing. ACM Transaction on Software Engineering and Methodolgies 32, 6 (2023),
     160:1–160:26.
[70] John Ross Quinlan. 1993. C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
[71] Wajid Rafique, Lianyong Qi, Ibrar Yaqoob, Muhammad Imran, Raihan Ur Rasool, and Wanchun Dou. 2020. Comple-
     menting IoT Services Through Software Defined Networking and Edge Computing: A Comprehensive Survey. IEEE
     Communications Surveys & Tutorials 22, 3 (2020), 1761–1804.
[72] RYU Project Team. 2014. RYU SDN Framework (1 ed.). RYU Project Team.
[73] Claude E. Shannon. 1948. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System Technical Journal 27, 3 (1948),
     379–423.
[74] Donghwan Shin, Domenico Bianculli, and Lionel C. Briand. 2022. PRINS: scalable model inference for component-based
     system logs. Empirical Software Engineering 27, 4 (2022), 1–32.
[75] Seung Yeob Shin, Shiva Nejati, Mehrdad Sabetzadeh, Lionel C. Briand, Chetan Arora, and Frank Zimmer. 2020. Dynamic
     adaptation of software-defined networks for IoT systems: a search-based approach. In Proceedings of the 15th IEEE/ACM
     International Symposium on Software Engineering for Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems. 137–148.
[76] Seung Yeob Shin, Shiva Nejati, Mehrdad Sabetzadeh, Lionel C. Briand, and Frank Zimmer. 2018. Test case prioritization
     for acceptance testing of cyber physical systems: a multi-objective search-based approach. In Proceedings of the 27th
     ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. 49–60.
[77] Apoorv Shukla, Said Jawad Saidi, Stefan Schmid, Marco Canini, Thomas Zinner, and Anja Feldmann. 2020. Toward
     Consistent SDNs: A Case for Network State Fuzzing. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management 17, 2
     (2020), 668–681.
[78] Michael Smith, Robert Adams Edward, Mike Dvorkin, Youcef Laribi, Vijoy Pandey, Pankaj Garg, and Nik Weidenbacher.
     2016. OpFlex Control Protocol. Internet Draft draft-smith-opflex-03. Internet Engineering Task Force.
[79] Radu Stoenescu, Dragos Dumitrescu, Matei Popovici, Lorina Negreanu, and Costin Raiciu. 2018. Debugging P4
     programs with vera. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication.
     518–532.
[80] El-Ghazali Talbi. 2009. Metaheuristics: From design to implementation (1 ed.). John Wiley & Sons.
[81] Robert Wagner. 2001. Address Resolution Protocol Spoofing and Man-In-The-Middle Attacks. Technical Report. Escal
     Institute of Advanced Technologies. 1–9 pages.
[82] Neil Walkinshaw, Ramsay Taylor, and John Derrick. 2016. Inferring extended finite state machine models from software
     executions. Empirical Software Engineering 21, 3 (2016), 811–853.
[83] Shaowei Wang, David Lo, Lingxiao Jiang, Shahar Maoz, and Aditya Budi. 2015. Chapter 21 - Scalable Parallelization
     of Specification Mining Using Distributed Computing. In The Art and Science of Analyzing Software Data. Morgan
     Kaufmann, 623–648.


                                                                      , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
  42                                                              Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


  [84] Tao Wang, Fangming Liu, and Hong Xu. 2017. An Efficient Online Algorithm for Dynamic SDN Controller Assignment
       in Data Center Networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 25 (2017), 2788–2801.
  [85] Ian H. Witten, Eibe Frank, Mark A. Hall, and Christopher J. Pal. 2016. Data mining: practical machine learning tools
       and techniques (4 ed.). Elsevier.
  [86] Seungwon Woo, Seungsoo Lee, Jinwoo Kim, and Seungwon Shin. 2018. RE-CHECKER: Towards Secure RESTful
       Service in Software-Defined Networking. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Conference on Network Function Virtualization
       and Software Defined Networks. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 1–5.
  [87] Michał Zalewski. 2016. American Fuzzy Lop — Whitepaper. https://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/afl/technical_details.txt
  [88] Andreas Zeller, Rahul Gopinath, Marcel Böhme, Gordon Fraser, and Christian Holler. 2024. The Fuzzing Book. CISPA
       Helmholtz Center for Information Security. https://www.fuzzingbook.org/ Retrieved 2024-07-01 16:50:18+02:00.
  [89] Peng Zhang. 2017. Towards rule enforcement verification for software defined networks. In Proceedings of the 2017
       IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 1–9.

  A          Additional Results for RYU Study Subject
  A.1          Results for RQ1

                    SeqFuzzSDN          FuzzSDNE              BEADSE                DELTAE                 combined
             100%
SeqFuzzSDN




              75%
              50%
              25%
               0%
             100%
FuzzSDNE




              75%
              50%
              25%
               0%
             100%
              75%
BEADSE




              50%
              25%
               0%
             100%
              75%
DELTAE




              50%
              25%
               0%
                    S+F     F          S+F         F       S+F         F         S+F         F            S+F        F

  Fig. A.1. Comparing the sensitivity of the EFSMs generated by SeqFuzzSDN, FuzzSDN𝐸 , Beads𝐸 , and Delta𝐸 ,
  the five plots in each row display the sensitivity of the corresponding tool. The first four columns represent
  the sensitivity of the EFSMs assessed using the test dataset containing message sequences generated by
  each tool. Sensitivity is assessed using message sequences that lead to both success and failure, denoted by
  (S+F), and only failure, denoted by (F). The last column represents the sensitivity assessed using all datasets
  generated by the four tools. The boxplots (25%-50%-75%) show the distribution of sensitivity over 10 runs of
  each tool in EXP1 (RYU).

     In EXP1, when ONOS is replaced with RYU, Figure A.1 corresponds to Figure 7. Figure A.1
  shows that SeqFuzzSDN achieves a sensitivity of 49.18% on the message sequences leading to both
  success and failure (referred to as the combined S+F dataset) and 63.37% on the message sequences
  leading only to failure (referred to as the combined F dataset). Specifically, SeqFuzzSDN achieves,
  on average, a sensitivity of 60.92% on the SeqFuzzSDN S+F dataset and 90.0% on the SeqFuzzSDN F

  , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                                                                                                            43

            1.00
                                                                                                                                                          400
            0.99                                                                           20                                                             350




                                                         # unique failure-inducing paths
            0.98                                                                                                                                          300




                                                                                                                                          Failure count
                                                                                           15                                                             250
NCD Score




            0.97                                                                                                                                          200
                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                          150
            0.96
                                                                                                                                                          100
                                                                                            5
            0.95                                                                                                                                           50
                                                                                                                                                            0
            0.94                                                                            0                                                                   SeqFuzzSDN FuzzSDNE   BEADSE   DELTAE
                   SeqFuzzSDN FuzzSDNE BEADSE   DELTAE                                          SeqFuzzSDN FuzzSDNE   BEADSE     DELTAE                                         Method

                        (a) NCD scores                       (b) Number of unique failure paths                                                                   (c) Number of failures

Fig. A.2. Comparing (a) the NCD scores of the message sequences, (b) the number of unique failure-inducing
paths in the EFSMs, and (c) the number of message sequences leading to failure, all obtained from SeqFuzzSDN,
FuzzSDN𝐸 , Beads𝐸 , and Delta𝐸 . The boxplots (25%-50%-75%) show the distribution of each metric over 10
runs of each tool in EXP1 (RYU).


dataset, 5.04% on the FuzzSDN𝐸 S+F dataset and 0.00% on the FuzzSDN𝐸 F dataset, 63.87% on the
Beads𝐸 S+F dataset and 82.56% on the Beads𝐸 F dataset, and 66.89% on the Delta𝐸 S+F dataset
and 80.91% on the Delta𝐸 F dataset.
   Figure A.1 also shows the average EFSM sensitivity for RYU, for FuzzSDN𝐸 , Beads𝐸 , and Delta𝐸 ,
respectively, of 26.18%, 11.96%, and 5.43% on the combined S+F dataset, and 25.0%, 3.71%, and
1.67% on the combined F dataset. More specifically, using the SeqFuzzSDN S+F dataset (and the
SeqFuzzSDN F dataset), these three baselines achieve, respectively, on average, sensitivities of
0%, 20.41%, and 4.87% (and 0%, 0.67%, and 3.20%). Regarding the FuzzSDN𝐸 S+F dataset (and the
FuzzSDN𝐸 F dataset), these three baselines achieve, respectively, on average, sensitivities of 92.29%,
1.51%, and 2.26% (and 100%, 0%, and 0%). For the Beads𝐸 S+F dataset (and the Beads𝐸 F dataset),
these three baselines achieve, respectively, on average, sensitivities of 0%, 18.05%, and 0% (and
0%, 11.50%, and 0%). Lastly, when using the Delta𝐸 S+F dataset (and the Delta𝐸 F dataset), these
baselines achieve, respectively, on average, sensitivities of 0%, 14.24%, and 19.44% (and 0%, 0%, and
6.67%).
   Figure A.2 compares (a) the NCD scores of the message sequences, (b) the number of unique
failure-inducing paths in the EFSMs, and (c) the number of message sequences leading to failure,
which are obtained from 10 runs of SeqFuzzSDN, FuzzSDN𝐸 , Beads𝐸 , and Delta𝐸 for our RYU
study subject. Figure A.2a shows that SeqFuzzSDN achieves a higher NCD score, with an average
of 0.997, compared to those of the baselines. Figure A.2b shows that, on average, SeqFuzzSDN was
able to infer an EFSM containing 6 unique loop-free paths that lead to failure, which is significantly
higher than the others. From these results, similarly to our ONOS study subject, we found that
SeqFuzzSDN generates more diverse sequences of control messages that exercise a larger number
of state changes compared to the baselines.
   However, Figure A.2c shows that FuzzSDN𝐸 generates a larger number of message sequences
(an average of 141) leading to failure compared to the other tools, while SeqFuzzSDN generates, on
average, 76 message sequences leading to failure, thus outperforming Beads𝐸 and Delta𝐸 . As with
our ONOS study subject, even though FuzzSDN𝐸 outperforms SeqFuzzSDN in terms of number of
failures, recall from Figure A.2a and Figure A.2b that FuzzSDN𝐸 generates message sequences that

                                                                                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
    44                                                            Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


    are less diverse and exercise significantly fewer number of state changes compared to SeqFuzzSDN.
    Furthermore, as described in Section 3, SeqFuzzSDN aims to generate a balanced number of message
    sequences that lead to success and failure, rather than focusing solely on the latter.

    A.2            Results for RQ2

                                   SeqFuzzSDN                                         SeqFuzzSDNNS
                 1000                                             1000
                          Fuzzing step                                       Fuzzing step
                  900     Learning step                            900       Learning step
                          Planning step                                      Planning step
                  800                                              800
                  700                                              700
Time (minutes)




                  600                                              600
                  500                                              500
                  400                                              400
                  300                                              300
                  200                                              200
                  100                                              100
                    00    5      10       15       20        25      00       5       10       15      20      25
                                      Iteration                                            Iteration
    Fig. A.3. Comparing the execution time per iteration for the fuzzing, learning, and planning steps of Seq-
    FuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 within a 3-day time budget. The execution times shown in this figure are the
    average values observed over 10 runs of EXP2 (RYU).


       Figure A.3 compares SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 with regard to the execution times per
    iteration for the fuzzing, learning, and planning steps over a time budget of 3 days, for our RYU
    study subject. Similarly to Figure 10, the bar graph shows the average execution times taken by
    SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 for the fuzzing, learning, and planning steps at each iteration,
    based on 10 runs of EXP2 for RYU.
       The results show that the fuzzing time per iteration remains constant at around 70 minutes for
    both SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 , indicating that the fuzzing step is independent of the tool
    used. For the planning step, Figure A.3 shows that the planning time does not exceed 150 minutes
    in both SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 . Figure A.3 also suggests that, for SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 , the
    time required to learn an EFSM increases significantly with each iteration due to the growing size
    of the dataset fed to Mint. Furthermore, we observe that, as opposed to our ONOS study subject,
    the learning time for SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 does not reach the upper learning limit of 12h, but grows
    from under 1 minute to above 150 minutes. This finding aligns with the literature [30, 74, 83], as
    inferring EFSMs is a complex problem that scales poorly with larger input sizes. In contrast, the
    results for SeqFuzzSDN indicate that the time required for inferring an EFSM (i.e., the learning step)
    remains below 20 minutes due to the application of the sampling technique. Thus, based on the

    , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
    Learning-Guided Fuzzing for Testing Stateful SDN Controllers                                                                               45

                               Fuzzing Step                                  Learning Step                         Planning Step
                 300                Fuzzing Step + Configuration                             Learning Step                          Planning Step
                                    Fuzzing Step
                 250

                 200
Time (minutes)




                 150

                 100

                  50

                   0 1 SW 2 SW 4 SW 8 SW 16 SW 1 SW 2 SW 4 SW 8 SW 16 SW 1 SW 2 SW 4 SW 8 SW 16 SW

    Fig. A.4. Boxplots (25%-50%-75%) representing the distributions of time taken in minutes for the fuzzing,
    learning, and planning steps of SeqFuzzSDN. This figure includes the times observed over 10 runs of SeqFuz-
    zSDN with 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 switch configurations controlled by RYU.


    results shown in Figure A.3, we can further conclude that applying the sampling technique enables
    SeqFuzzSDN to overcome the scalability issues associated with the complexity of learning EFSMs.

    Table A.1. Statistical significance analysis using the Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test for sensitivity, diversity, and
    coverage results obtained from 10 runs of EXP2 (RYU).

          Metric                  Average                              Average                     p-value                Statistical
                               (SeqFuzzSDN)                        (SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 )                                      Significance
                                                                                                                          (𝛼 = 0.05)
          Sensitivity              0.553                                0.534                       0.385              Not Significant
          Diversity                0.9976                               0.9975                      0.987              Not Significant
          Coverage                 0.5866                               0.8248                      0.0023              Significant


       Furthermore, Table A.1 presents the statistical test results for the distributions of sensitivity,
    diversity, and coverage (described in Section 3) achieved by SeqFuzzSDN and SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 after
    10 runs of EXP2, using the Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test [38] with an 𝛼 value of 0.05, for our RYU
    test subject. On average, SeqFuzzSDN (resp. SeqFuzzSDN𝑁 𝑆 ) achieves a sensitivity of 55.3% (resp.
    53.4%), a diversity of 0.9976 (resp. 0.9975), and a coverage of 0.5866 (resp. 0.8248). We observed
    that the differences in sensitivity (𝑝 = 0.18) and diversity (𝑝 = 0.7) are not significant, while the
    difference in coverage (𝑝 = 0.002) is. The results indicate that the use of the sampling technique
    does not negatively impact the sensitivity of the generated EFSMs nor the diversity of the generated
    message sequences, on our RYU test subject. However, the coverage achieved by SeqFuzzSDN has
    significantly improved, suggesting that, similarly to our ONOS test subject, the states in the EFSM
    are explored more thoroughly.

    A.3                Results for RQ3
   Figure A.4 presents the distributions of execution times (25%-50%-75% boxplots) for the fuzzing,
   learning, and planning steps of SeqFuzzSDN, obtained from EXP3 (RYU). These execution times
   were measured using the five study subjects in EXP3, which consist of 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 switches
   controlled by RYU. As shown in Figure 11, the execution time taken for the fuzzing step is, on

                                                                                         , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
46                                                       Raphaël Ollando, Seung Yeob Shin, and Lionel C. Briand


average, 203 minutes for the 1-switch configuration, 60 minutes for 2 switches, 70 minutes for
4 switches, 95 minutes for 8 switches, and 109 minutes for 16 switches. The learning step took,
on average, 10 minutes for the 1-switch configuration, 3 minutes for 2 switches, 9 minutes for
4 switches, 2 minutes for 8 switches, and 1 minute for 16 switches. The planning step took, on
average, 44 minutes for the 1-switch configuration, 31 minutes for 2 switches, 47 minutes for 4
switches, 28 minutes for 8 switches, and 33 minutes for 16 switches. These results are consistent
with our findings from EXP3 (ONOS).




, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2025.
