                                                                                                                                  49

Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark

AHMAD HAZIMEH, EPFL, Switzerland
ADRIAN HERRERA, ANU & DST, Australia
MATHIAS PAYER, EPFL, Switzerland
High scalability and low running costs have made fuzz testing the de facto standard for discovering software
bugs. Fuzzing techniques are constantly being improved in a race to build the ultimate bug-finding tool.
However, while fuzzing excels at finding bugs in the wild, evaluating and comparing fuzzer performance is
challenging due to the lack of metrics and benchmarks. For example, crash count—perhaps the most commonly-
used performance metric—is inaccurate due to imperfections in deduplication techniques. Additionally, the
lack of a unified set of targets results in ad hoc evaluations that hinder fair comparison.
   We tackle these problems by developing Magma, a ground-truth fuzzing benchmark that enables uniform
fuzzer evaluation and comparison. By introducing real bugs into real software, Magma allows for the realistic
evaluation of fuzzers against a broad set of targets. By instrumenting these bugs, Magma also enables the
collection of bug-centric performance metrics independent of the fuzzer. Magma is an open benchmark
consisting of seven targets that perform a variety of input manipulations and complex computations, presenting
a challenge to state-of-the-art fuzzers.
   We evaluate seven widely-used mutation-based fuzzers (AFL, AFLFast, AFL++, FairFuzz, MOpt-AFL,
honggfuzz, and SymCC-AFL) against Magma over 200,000 CPU-hours. Based on the number of bugs reached,
triggered, and detected, we draw conclusions about the fuzzers’ exploration and detection capabilities. This
provides insight into fuzzer performance evaluation, highlighting the importance of ground truth in performing
more accurate and meaningful evaluations.
CCS Concepts: • General and reference → Metrics; Evaluation; • Software and its engineering →
Software defect analysis; • Security and privacy → Software and application security;
Keywords: fuzzing; benchmark; software security; performance evaluation
ACM Reference Format:
Ahmad Hazimeh, Adrian Herrera, and Mathias Payer. 2020. Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark. In
Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, 3, Article 49 (December 2020). ACM, New York, NY. 29 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3428334

1    INTRODUCTION
Fuzz testing (“fuzzing”) is a widely-used dynamic bug discovery technique. A fuzzer procedurally
generates inputs and subjects the target program (the “target”) to these inputs with the aim of
triggering a fault (i.e., discovering a bug). Fuzzing is an inherently sound but incomplete bug-finding
process (given finite resources). State-of-the-art fuzzers rely on crashes to mark faulty program
behavior. The existence of a crash is generally symptomatic of a bug (soundness), but the lack of a
This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation program (grant agreement No. 850868).
Authors’ addresses: Ahmad Hazimeh, EPFL, Switzerland, ahmad.hazimeh@epfl.ch; Adrian Herrera, ANU & DST, Australia,
adrian.herrera@anu.edu.au; Mathias Payer, EPFL, Switzerland, mathias.payer@nebelwelt.net.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
2476-1249/2020/12-ART49 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3428334


                         Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
49:2                                                                                               A. Hazimeh, et al.

crash does not necessarily mean that the program is bug-free (incompleteness). Fuzzing is wildly
successful in finding bugs in open-source [2] and commercial off-the-shelf [4, 5, 51] software.
    The success of fuzzing has resulted in an explosion of new techniques claiming to improve
bug-finding performance [38]. In order to highlight improvements, these techniques are typically
evaluated across a range of metrics, including: (i) crash counts; (ii) ground-truth bug counts; and/or
(iii) code-coverage profiles. While these metrics provide some insight into a fuzzer’s performance,
we argue that they are insufficient for use in fuzzer comparisons. Furthermore, the set of targets
that these metrics are evaluated on can vary wildly across papers, making cross-fuzzer comparisons
impossible. Each of these metrics has particular deficiencies.
  Crash counts. The simplest fuzzer evaluation method is to count the number of crashes triggered
by a fuzzer, and compare this crash count with that achieved by another fuzzer (on the same target).
Unfortunately, crash counts often inflate the number of actual bugs in the target [30]. Moreover,
deduplication techniques (e.g., coverage profiles, stack hashes) fail to accurately identify the root
cause of these crashes [8, 30].
   Bug counts. Identifying a crash’s root cause is preferable to simply reporting raw crashes, as
it avoids the inflation problem inherent in crash counts. Unfortunately, obtaining an accurate
ground-truth bug count typically requires extensive manual triage, which in turn requires someone
with extensive domain expertise and experience [41].
   Code-coverage profiles. Code-coverage profiles are another performance metric commonly used
to evaluate and compare fuzzing techniques. Intuitively, covering more code correlates with finding
more bugs. However, previous work [30] has shown that there is a weak correlation between
coverage-deduplicated crashes and ground-truth bugs, implying that higher coverage does not
necessarily indicate better fuzzer effectiveness.
   The deficiencies of existing performance metrics calls for a rethinking of fuzzer evaluation
practices. In particular, the performance metrics used in these evaluations must accurately measure
a fuzzer’s ability to achieve its main objective: finding bugs. Similarly, the targets that are used to
assess how well a fuzzer meets this objective must be realistic and exercise diverse behavior. This
allows a practitioner to have confidence that a given fuzzing technique will yield improvements
when deployed in real-world environments.
   To satisfy these criteria, we present Magma, a ground-truth fuzzer benchmark based on real
programs with real bugs. Magma consists of seven widely-used open-source libraries and applica-
tions, totalling 2 MLOC. For each Magma workload, we manually analyze security-relevant bug
reports and patches, reinserting defective code back into these seven programs (in total, 118 bugs
were analyzed and reinserted). Additionally, each reinserted bug is accompanied by a light-weight
oracle that detects and reports if the bug is reached or triggered. This distinction between reaching
and triggering a bug—in addition to a fuzzer’s ability to detect a triggered bug—presents a new
opportunity to evaluate a fuzzer across multiple dimensions (again, focusing on ground-truth bugs).
   The remainder of this paper presents the motivation behind Magma, the methodology behind
Magma’s design and choice of performance metrics, implementation details, and a set of preliminary
results that demonstrate Magma’s utility. We make the following contributions:
    • A set of bug-centric performance metrics for a fuzzer benchmark that allow for a fair and
       accurate evaluation and comparison of fuzzers.
    • A quantitative comparison of existing fuzzer benchmarks.
    • The design and implementation of Magma, a ground-truth fuzzing benchmark based on real
       programs with real bugs.
    • An evaluation of Magma against seven widely-used fuzzers.

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark                                                                         49:3

2     BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
This section introduces fuzzing as a software testing technique, and how new fuzzing techniques
are currently evaluated and compared against existing ones. This aims to motivate the need for
new fuzzer evaluation practices.

2.1    Fuzz testing (fuzzing)
A fuzzer is a dynamic testing tool that discovers software flaws by running a target program (the
“target”) with a large number of automatically-generated inputs. Importantly, these inputs are
generated with the intention of triggering a crash in the target. This input generation process
is dependent on the fuzzer’s knowledge of the target’s input format and program structure. For
example, grammar-based fuzzers (e.g., Superion [63], Peachfuzz [42], and QuickFuzz [22]) leverage
the target’s input format (which must be specified a priori) to intelligently craft inputs (e.g., based on
data width and type, and on the relationships between different input fields). In contrast, mutational
fuzzers (e.g., AFL [66], Angora [12], and MemFuzz [13]) require no a priori knowledge of the input
format. Instead, mutational fuzzers leverage preprogrammed mutation operations to iteratively
modify the input.
   Fuzzers are classified by their knowledge of the target’s program structure. For example, whitebox
fuzzers [17, 18, 47] leverage program analysis to infer knowledge about the program structure. In
comparison, blackbox fuzzers [3, 64] blindly generate inputs in the hope of discovering a crash.
Finally, greybox fuzzers [12, 34, 66] leverage program instrumentation (instead of program analysis)
to collect runtime information. Program-structure knowledge guides input generation in a manner
more likely to trigger a crash.
   Importantly, fuzzing is a highly stochastic bug-finding process. This randomness is independent
of whether the fuzzer synthesizes inputs from a grammar (grammar-based fuzzing), transforms
an existing set of inputs to arrive at new inputs (mutational fuzzing), has no knowledge of that
target’s internals (blackbox fuzzing), or uses sophisticated program analyses to understand the
target (whitebox fuzzing). The stochastic nature of fuzzing makes evaluating and comparing fuzzers
difficult. This problem is exacerbated by existing fuzzer evaluation metrics and benchmarks.

2.2    The Current State of Fuzzer Evaluation
The rapid emergence of new and improved fuzzing techniques [38] means that fuzzers are constantly
compared against one another, in order to empirically demonstrate that the latest fuzzer supersedes
previous state-of-the-art fuzzers. To enable fair and accurate fuzzer evaluation, it is critical that
fuzzing campaigns are conducted on a suitable benchmark that uses an appropriate set of metrics.
Unfortunately, fuzzer evaluations have so far been ad hoc and haphazard. For example, Klees et
al.’s study of 32 fuzzing papers found that none of the surveyed papers provided sufficient detail to
support their claims of fuzzer improvement [30]. Notably, their study highlights a set of criteria
that should be adopted across all fuzzer evaluations. These criteria include:
Performance metrics: How the fuzzers are evaluated and compared. This is typically one of the
      approaches previously discussed (crash count, bug count, or coverage profiling).
Targets: The software being fuzzed. This software should be both diverse and realistic so that a
      practitioner has confidence that the fuzzer will perform similarly in real-world environments.
Seed selection: The initial set of inputs that bootstrap the fuzzing process. This initial set of inputs
      should be consistent across repeated trials and the fuzzers under evaluation.
Trial duration (timeout): The length of a single fuzzing trial should also be consistent across
      repeated trials and the fuzzers under evaluation. We use the term trial to refer to an instance

                     Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
49:4                                                                                               A. Hazimeh, et al.

     of the fuzzing process on a target program, while a fuzzing campaign is a set of 𝑁 repeated
     trials on the same target.
Number of trials: The highly-stochastic nature of fuzzing necessitates a large number of repeated
     trials, allowing for a statistically sound comparison of results.
 Klees et al.’s study demonstrates the need for a ground-truth fuzzing benchmark. Such a benchmark
must use suitable performance metrics and present a unified set of targets.
   2.2.1 Existing Fuzzer Benchmarks. Fuzzers are typically evaluated on a set of targets sourced
from one of the following benchmarks. These benchmarks are summarized in Table 1.
   The LAVA-M [14] test suite (built on top of coreutils-8.24) aims to evaluate the effectiveness
of a fuzzer’s exploration capability by injecting bugs in different execution paths. However, the
LAVA bug injection technique only injects a single, simple bug type: an out-of-bounds memory
access triggered by a “magic value” comparison. This bug type does not accurately represent
the statefulness and complexity of bugs encountered in real-world software. We quantify these
observations in Section 6.3.6.
   In contrast, the Cyber Grand Challenge (CGC) [11] sample set provides a wider variety of bugs
that are suitable for testing a fuzzer’s fault detection capabilities. Unfortunately, the relatively small
size and simplicity of the CGC’s synthetic workloads does not enable thorough evaluation of the
fuzzer’s ability to explore complex programs.
   BugBench [35] and the Google Fuzzer Test Suite (FTS) [20] both contain real programs with
real bugs. However, each target only contains one or two bugs (on average). This sparsity of
bugs, combined with the lack of automatic methods for triaging crashes, hinders adoption and
makes both benchmarks unsuitable for fuzzer evaluation. In contrast, Google FuzzBench [19]—the
successor to the Google FTS—is a fuzzer evaluation platform that relies solely on coverage profiles
as a performance metric. As previously discussed, this metric has limited utility when evaluating
fuzzers on their bug-finding capability. UniFuzz [33]—which was developed concurrently but
independently from Magma—is similarly built on real programs containing real bugs. However, it
lacks ground-truth knowledge and it is unclear how many bugs each target contains. Not knowing
how many bugs exist in a benchmark makes fuzzer comparisons challenging.
   Finally, popular open-source software (OSS) is often used to evaluate fuzzers [10, 30, 31, 37, 44, 62].
Although real-world software is used, the lack of ground-truth knowledge about the triggered
crashes makes it difficult to provide an accurate, verifiable, quantitative evaluation. First, it is

Table 1. Summary of existing fuzzer benchmarks and our benchmark, Magma. We characterize benchmarks
across two dimensions: the targets that make up the benchmark workloads and the bugs that exist across
these workloads. For both dimensions we count the number of workloads/bugs (#) and classify them as Real
or Synthetic. Bug density is the mean number of bugs per workload. Finally, ground truth may be available
(✓), available but not easily accessible (◗), or unavailable (✗).

                                        Workloads                 Bugs
        Benchmark                                                                  Bug Density     Ground truth
                                    #    Real/Synthetic      #   Real/Synthetic
        BugBench [35]              17          R            19          R                  1.12         ◗
        CGC [11]                  131          S           590          S                  4.50         ◗
        Google FTS [20]            24          R            47          R                  1.96         ◗
        Google FuzzBench [19]      21          R             −          −                     −         −
        LAVA-M [14]                 4          R          2265          S                566.25         ✓
        UniFuzz [33]               20          R             ?          R                     ?         ✗
        Open-source software        −          R             ?          R                     ?         ✗
        Magma                       7          R           118          R                 16.86         ✓


Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark                                                                        49:5

often unclear which software version is used, making fair cross-paper comparisons impossible.
Second, multiple software versions introduce version divergence, a subtle evaluation flaw shared
by both crash and bug count metrics. After running for an extended period, a fuzzer’s ability to
discover new bugs diminishes over time [9]. If a second fuzzer later fuzzes a new version of the
same program—with the bugs found by the first fuzzer appropriately patched—then the first fuzzer
will find fewer bugs in this newer version. Version divergence is also inherent in UniFuzz, which
builds on top of older versions of OSS.

   2.2.2 Crashes as a Performance Metric. Most, if not all, state-of-the-art fuzzers implement fault
detection as a crash listener. A program crash can be caused by an architectural violation (e.g.,
division-by-zero, unmapped/unprivileged page access) or by a sanitizer (a dynamic bug-finding
tool that generates a crash when a security policy violation—e.g., object out-of-bounds, type safety
violation—occurs [55]).
   The simplicity of crash detection has led to the widespread use of crash count as a performance
metric for comparing fuzzers. However, crash counts have been shown to yield inflated results,
even when combined with deduplication methods (e.g., coverage profiles and stack hashes) [8, 30].
Instead, the number of bugs found by each fuzzer should be compared: if fuzzer 𝐴 finds more
bugs than fuzzer 𝐵, then 𝐴 is superior to 𝐵. Unfortunately, there is no single formal definition
for a bug. Defining a bug in its proper context is best achieved by formally modeling program
behavior. However, deriving formal program models is a difficult and time-consuming task. As such,
bug detection techniques tend to create a blacklist of faulty behavior, mislabeling or overlooking
some bug classes in the process. This often leads to incomplete detection of bugs and root-cause
misidentification, resulting in a duplication of crashes and an inflated set of results.

3   DESIRED BENCHMARK PROPERTIES
Benchmarks are important drivers for computer science research and product development [7].
Several factors must be taken into account when designing a benchmark, including: relevance;
reproducibility; fairness; verifiability; and usability [1, 60]. While building benchmarks around these
properties is well studied [1, 7, 24, 29, 35, 50, 52, 57, 60], the highly-stochastic nature of fuzzing
introduces new challenges for benchmark designers.
   For example, reproducibility is a key benchmark property that ensures a benchmark produces
“the same results consistently for a particular test environment” [60]. However, individual fuzzing
trials vary wildly in performance, requiring a large number of repeated trials for a particular
test environment [30]. While performance variance exists in most benchmarks (e.g., the SPEC
CPU benchmark [57] uses the median of three repeated trials to account for small variations
across environments), this variance is more pronounced in fuzzing. Furthermore, a fuzzer may
actively modify the test environment (e.g., T-Fuzz [44] and FuzzGen [26] transform the target,
while Skyfire [62] generates new seed inputs for the target). This is very different to traditional
performance benchmarks (e.g., SPEC CPU [57], DaCapo [7]), where the workloads and their inputs
remain fixed across all systems-under-test. This leads us to define the following set of properties
that we argue must exist in a fuzzing benchmark:
Diversity (P1): The benchmark contains a wide variety of bugs and programs that resemble real
      software testing scenarios.
Verifiability (P2): The benchmark yields verifiable metrics that accurately describe performance.
Usability (P3): The benchmark is accessible and has no significant barriers for adoption.
These three properties are explored in the remainder of this section, while Section 4 describes how
Magma satisfies these criteria.

                    Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
49:6                                                                                               A. Hazimeh, et al.

3.1    Diversity (P1)
Fuzzers are actively used to find bugs in a variety of real programs [2, 4, 5, 51]. Therefore, a fuzzing
benchmark must evaluate fuzzers against programs and bugs that resemble those encountered in
the “real world”. To this end, a benchmark must include a diverse set of bugs and programs.
   Bugs should be diverse with respect to:
Class: Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) [40] bug classes include memory-based errors,
       type errors, concurrency issues, and numeric errors.
Distribution: “Depth”, fan-in (i.e, the number of paths which execute the bug), and spread (i.e.,
       the ratio of faulty-path counts to the total number of paths).
Complexity: Number of input bytes involved in triggering a bug, the range of input values which
       triggers the bug, and the transformations performed on the input.
   Similarly, targets (i.e, the benchmark workloads) should be diverse with respect to:
Application domain: File and media processing, network protocols, document parsing, cryptog-
       raphy primitives, and data encoding.
Operations performed: Parsing, checksum calculation, indirection, transformation, state man-
       agement, and data validation.
Input structure: Binary, text, formats/grammars, and data size.
   Satisfying the diversity property requires bugs that resemble those encountered in real-world
environments. Both LAVA-M and Google FuzzBench fail this requirement: the former contains only
a single bug class (an out-of-bounds memory access), while FuzzBench does not consider bugs as
an evaluation metric. BugBench primarily focuses on memory corruption vulnerabilities, but also
contains uninitialized read, memory leak, data race, atomicity, and semantic bugs (totalling nine
bug classes). Conversely, Google FTS and FuzzBench satisfy the target diversity requirement: both
contain workloads from a wide variety of application domains (e.g., cryptography, image parsing,
text processing, and compilers).
   Ultimately, real programs are the only source of real bugs. Therefore, a benchmark designed to
evaluate fuzzers must include real programs with a variety of real bugs, thus ensuring diversity and
avoiding bias (e.g., towards a specific bug class). Whereas discovering and reporting real bugs is
desirable (i.e, when OSS is used), performance metrics based on an unknown set of bugs (with an
unknown distribution) make it impossible to compare fuzzers. Instead, fuzzers should be evaluated
on workloads containing known bugs for which ground truth is available and verifiable.

3.2    Verifiability (P2)
Existing ground-truth fuzzing benchmarks lack a straightforward mechanism for determining a
crash’s root cause. This makes it difficult to verify a fuzzer’s results. Crash count, a widely-used
performance metric, suffers from high variability, double-counting, and inconsistent results across
multiple trials (see Section 2.2.2). Automated techniques for deduplicating crashes are not reliable,
and hence should not be used to verify the bugs discovered by a fuzzer. Ultimately, a fuzzing
benchmark should provide a set of known bugs for which ground truth can be used to verify a
fuzzer’s findings.
   While the CGC sample set provides crashing inputs—also known as a proof of vulnerability
(PoV)—for all known bugs, it does not provide a mechanism for determining the root cause of a
fuzzer-generated crash. Similarly, the Google FTS provides PoVs (for 87 % of bugs) and a script for
triaging and deduplicating crashes. This script parses the crash report or looks for a specific line of
code at which to terminate program execution. However, this approach is limited and does not
allow for the detection of complex bugs (e.g., where simply executing a line of code is not sufficient
to trigger the bug).

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark                                                                        49:7

   In contrast to the CGC and Google FTS benchmarks, for which ground truth is available but not
easily accessible, LAVA-M clearly reports the bug triggered by a crashing input. However, LAVA-M
does not provide a runtime interface for accessing this information. Unless a fuzzer is specialized
to collect LAVA-M metrics, it cannot monitor progress in real-time. Thus, a post-processing step is
required to collect metrics. Finally, Google FuzzBench relies solely on coverage profiles (rather than
fault-based metrics) to evaluate and compare fuzzers. FuzzBench dismisses the need for ground
truth, which we believe sacrifices the significance of the results: more coverage does not necessarily
imply higher bug-finding effectiveness.
   Ground-truth bug knowledge allows for a fuzzer’s findings to be verified, enabling accurate
performance evaluation and allowing meaningful comparisons between fuzzers. To this end, a
fuzzing benchmark must provide easy access to ground-truth metrics describing the bugs a fuzzer
can reach, trigger, and detect.

3.3    Usability (P3)
Fuzzers have evolved from simple blackbox random-input generation to complex control- and data-
flow analysis tools. Each fuzzer may introduce its own instrumentation into a target (e.g., AFL [66]),
run the target in a specific execution engine (e.g., QSYM [65], Driller [58]), or provide inputs through
a specific channel (e.g., libFuzzer [34]). Fuzzers come in a variety of forms (described in Section 2.1),
so a fuzzing benchmark must not exclude a particular type of fuzzer. Additionally, using a benchmark
must be manageable and straightforward: it should not require constant user intervention, and
benchmarking should finish within a reasonable time frame. The inherent randomness of fuzzing
complicates this, as multiple trials are required to achieve statistically-meaningful results.
   Some existing benchmark workloads (e.g., those from CGC and Google FTS) contain multiple
bugs, so it is not sufficient to only run the fuzzer until the first crash is encountered. However, the
lack of easily-accessible ground truth makes it difficult to determine if/when all bugs are triggered.
Moreover, inaccurate deduplication techniques mean that the user cannot simply equate the number
of crashes with the number of bugs. Thus, additional time must be spent triaging crashes to obtain
ground-truth bug counts, further complicating the benchmarking process.
   In summary, a benchmark should be usable by fuzzer developers, without introducing insur-
mountable or impractical barriers to adoption. To satisfy this property, a benchmark must thus
provide a small set of targets with a large number of discoverable bugs, and it must provide a usable
framework that measures and reports fuzzer progress and performance.

4     MAGMA: APPROACH
We present Magma, a ground-truth fuzzing benchmark that satisfies the previously-discussed
benchmark properties. Magma is a collection of seven targets with widespread use in real-world
environments. These initial targets have been carefully selected for their diversity and the variety
of security-critical bugs that have been reported throughout their lifetimes (satisfying P1).
   Importantly, Magma’s seven workloads contain 118 bugs for which ground truth is easily accessible
and verifiable (satisfying P2). These bugs are sourced from older versions of the seven workloads,
and then forward-ported to the latest version contained within Magma. Finally, Magma imposes
minimal requirements on the user, allowing fuzzer developers to seamlessly integrate the benchmark
into their development cycle (satisfying P3).
   For each workload, we manually inspect bug and vulnerability reports to find bugs that are
suitable for inclusion in Magma (e.g., ensuring that the bug affects the core codebase). For these
bugs, we reintroduce (“inject”) each bug into the latest version of the code through a process we
call forward-porting (see Section 4.2). In addition to the bug, we also insert minimal source-code
instrumentation—a canary—to collect data about a fuzzer’s ability to reach and trigger the bug

                    Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
49:8                                                                                                       A. Hazimeh, et al.

(see Section 4.3). A bug is reached when the faulty line of code is executed, and triggered when the
fault condition is satisfied. Finally, Magma provides a runtime monitor that runs in parallel with the
fuzzer to collect real-time statistics. These statistics are used to evaluate the fuzzer (see Section 4.4).
   Fuzzer evaluation is based on the number of bugs reached, triggered, and detected. The Magma
instrumentation only yields usable information when the fuzzer exercises the instrumented code,
allowing us to determine whether a bug is reached. The fuzzer-generated input triggers a bug when
the input’s dataflow satisfies the bug’s trigger condition(s). Once triggered, the fuzzer should flag
the bug as a fault or crash, enabling us to assess the fuzzer’s bug detection capability. These metrics
are described further in Section 4.3.
   Finally, Magma provides a fatal canaries mode. In fatal canaries mode, the program is terminated
if a canary’s condition is satisfied (similar to LAVA-M). The fuzzer then saves this crashing input for
post-processing. Fatal canaries are a form of ideal sanitization, in which triggering a bug immediately
results in a crash, regardless of the nature of the bug. Fatal canaries allow developers to evaluate their
fuzzers under ideal sanitization assumptions without incurring additional sanitization overhead.
This mode increases the number of executions during an evaluation, reducing the cost of evaluating
a fuzzer but sacrificing the ability to evaluate a fuzzer’s detection capabilities.

4.1        Target Selection
Magma contains seven targets, which we summarize in Table 2. In addition to these seven targets
(i.e., the codebases into which bugs are injected), Magma also includes 25 drivers (i.e., executable
programs that provide a command-line interface to the target) that exercise different functionality
within the target. Inspired by Google OSS-Fuzz [2], these drivers are sourced from the original
target codebases (as drivers are best developed by domain experts).
    Magma’s seven targets were selected for their diversity in functionality (summarized qualitatively
in Table 2). Inspired by benchmarks in other fields [7, 27, 48, 50], we apply Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) to quantify this diversity. PCA is a statistical analysis technique that transforms
an 𝑁 -dimensional space into a lower-dimensional space while preserving variance as much as
possible [43]. Reducing high-dimensional data into a set of principal components allows for the
application of visualization and/or clustering techniques to compare and discriminate benchmark
workloads.
    We apply PCA as follows. First, we use an Intel Pin [36] tool to record instruction traces for
𝐾 = 284 subjects (i.e., a library wrapped with a particular driver program [34, 39]): four from

Table 2. The targets, driver programs, bug counts, and evaluated features incorporated into Magma. The
versions used are the latest at the time of writing.
                                                                        Magic    Recursive                              Global
 Target     Drivers                   Version     File type      Bugs                        Compression    Checksums
                                                                        values    parsing                                state
 libpng     read_fuzzer, readpng      1.6.38      PNG               7     ✓         ✗            ✓             ✓          ✗
            read_rgba_fuzzer,
 libtiff                              4.1.0       TIFF             14     ✓         ✗            ✓              ✗         ✗
            tiffcp
            read_memory_fuzzer,
 libxml2                              2.9.10
            xml_reader_for_file_fuzzer,           XML              18     ✓         ✓            ✗              ✗         ✗
            xmllint
            pdf_fuzzer, pdfimages,
 poppler                              0.88.0      PDF              22     ✓         ✓            ✓             ✓          ✗
            pdftoppm
            asn1, asn1parse, bignum,
 openssl    bndiv, client, cms, conf, 3.0.0       Binary blobs     21     ✓         ✗            ✓             ✓          ✓
            crl, ct, server, x509
 sqlite3    sqlite3_fuzz              3.32.0      SQL queries      20     ✓         ✓            ✗              ✗         ✓
            exif, json, parser,
 php                                  8.0.0−dev   Various          16     ✓         ✓            ✗              ✗         ✗
            unserialize



Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark                                                                         49:9




Fig. 1. Scatter plots of benchmark scores over the first four principal components (which account for ∼60 %
of the variance in the benchmark workloads). Each point corresponds to a particular subject in a benchmark.


LAVA-M, 14 from the FTS, 25 from Magma, and 241 from the CGC [59]. Each trace is driven
by seeds provided by the benchmark (exercising functionality—and hence code—that would be
explored by a fuzzer) and contains instructions executed by both the subject and any linked
libraries. Second, instructions are categorized according to Intel XED, a disassembler built into
Pin. A XED instruction category is “a higher level semantic description of an instruction than its
opcodes” [25]. XED contains 𝑁 = 94 instruction categories, spanning logical, floating point, syscall,
and SIMD operations (amongst others). We use these categories as an approximation of the subject’s
functionality. Third, we create a matrix 𝑋 , where 𝑥𝑖 𝑗 ∈ 𝑋 (𝑖 ∈ [1, 𝑁 ] and 𝑗 ∈ [1, 𝐾]) is the mean
number of instructions executed in a particular category for a given subject (over all seeds supplied
with that subject). Finally, PCA is performed on a normalized version of 𝑋 . The first four principal
components, which in our case account for 60 % of the variance between benchmarks, are plotted
in a two-dimensional space in Figure 1.
   Figure 1 shows that the four LAVA-M workloads are tightly clustered over the first four principal
components. This is unsurprising, given that the LAVA-M workloads are all sourced from coreutils
and hence share the same codebase. In contrast, both the CGC and Magma provide a wide-variety of
workloads. For example, openssl—which contains a large amount of cryptographic and networking
code—appears distinct from the main clusters in Figure 1. The CGC’s TAINTEDLOVE workload is
similarly distinct, due to the relatively large number of floating point operations performed.

4.2   Bug Selection and Insertion
Magma contains 118 bugs, spanning 11 CWEs (summarized in Figure 2; the complete list of bugs is
given in Table A1). Compared to existing benchmarks, Magma has both the second-largest variety
of bugs (by CWE) and second-largest “bug density” (the ratio of the number of bugs to the number
of targets) after the CGC and LAVA-M, respectively. While the CGC has a wider variety of bugs, its
workloads are not indicative of real-world software (in terms of both size and complexity). Similarly,
while LAVA-M’s bug density (566.25 bugs per target) is an order-of-magnitude larger than Magma’s
(16.86 bugs per target), LAVA-M is restricted to a single, synthetic bug type.
   Importantly, Magma contains real bugs sourced from bug reports and forward-ported to the
most recent version of the target codebase. This is in contrast to existing fuzzing benchmarks (e.g.,
BugBench, Google FTS) that rely on old, unpatched versions of the target codebase. Unfortunately,
using older codebases limits the number of bugs available in each target (as evident by the low bug

                     Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
49:10                                                                                              A. Hazimeh, et al.




Fig. 2. Comparison of benchmark bug classes. The 𝑦-axis uses a log scale. A complete list of Magma bugs is
presented in Table A1.



densities in Table 1). In comparison, forward-porting—which is synonymous to back-porting fixes
from newer codebases to older, buggy releases—does not suffer from this issue, making Magma’s
targets easily extensible.
   Forward-porting begins with the identification—from the reported bug fix—of the code changes
that must be reverted to reintroduce the bug. Bug-fix commits can contain multiple fixes to one
or more bugs, so disambiguation is necessary to prevent the introduction of unintended bugs.
Alternatively, bug fixes may be spread over multiple commits (e.g., if the original fix did not cover
all edge cases). Following the identification of code changes, we identify what program state
is involved in evaluating the trigger condition. If necessary, we introduce additional program
variables to access that state. From this state, we determine a boolean expression that serves as
a light-weight oracle for identifying a triggered bug. Finally, we identify a point in the program
where we inject a canary before the bug can manifest faulty behavior. This canary helps measure
our fuzzer performance metrics, discussed in the following section.

4.3     Performance Metrics
Fuzzer evaluation has traditionally relied on crash counts, bug counts, and/or code-coverage
profiles for measuring and comparing fuzzer performance. While the problems with crash counts
and code-coverage profiles are well known (see Section 2.2.2), in our view, simply counting the
number of bugs discovered is too coarse-grained. Instead, we argue that it is important to distinguish
between reaching, triggering, and detecting a bug. Consequently, Magma uses these three bug-centric
performance metrics to evaluate fuzzers.
   A reached bug refers to a bug whose oracle was called, implying that the executed path reaches
the context of the bug, without necessarily triggering a fault. This is where coverage profiles fall
short: simply covering the faulty code does not mean that the program is in the correct state to
trigger the bug. Hence, a triggered bug refers to a bug that was reached, and whose triggering
condition was satisfied, indicating that a fault occurred. Whereas triggering a bug implies that
the program has transitioned into a faulty state, the symptoms of the fault may not be directly
observable at the oracle injection site. When a bug is triggered, the oracle only indicates that the

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark                                                                      49:11

conditions for a fault have been satisfied, but this does not imply that the fault was encountered or
detected by the fuzzer.
   Source-code instrumentation (i.e., the canary) provides ground-truth knowledge and runtime
feedback of reached and triggered bugs. Each bug is approximated by (a) the lines of code patched in
response to a bug report, and (b) a boolean expression representing the bug’s trigger condition. The
canary reports: (i) when the line of code is reached; and (ii) when the input satisfies the conditions
for faulty behavior (i.e., triggers the bug). Section 5.4 discusses how we prevent canaries from
leaking information to the system-under-test.
   Finally, we also draw a distinction between triggering and detecting a bug. Whereas most security-
critical bugs manifest as a low-level security policy violation for which state-of-the-art sanitizers
are well-suited (e.g., memory corruption, data races, invalid arithmetic), other bug classes are not as
easily observed. For example, resource exhaustion bugs are often detected long after the fault has
manifested, either through a timeout or an out-of-memory error. Even more obscure are semantic
bugs, whose malfunctions cannot be observed without a specification or reference. Consequently,
various fuzzing techniques have been developed to target these bug classes (e.g., SlowFuzz [46]
and NEZHA [45]). Such advancements in fuzzer techniques may benefit from an evaluation which
includes the bug detection rate as another dimension for comparison.

4.4    Runtime Monitoring
Magma provides a runtime monitor that collects real-time statistics from the instrumented target.
This provides a mechanism for visualizing the fuzzer’s progress and its evolution over time, without
complicating the instrumentation.
   The runtime monitor collects data about reached and triggered bugs (Section 4.3). Because
this data primarily relates to the fuzzer’s program exploration capabilities, we post-process the
monitor’s output to study the fuzzer’s fault detection capabilities. This is achieved by replaying the
crashing inputs (produced by the fuzzer) against the benchmark canaries to determine which bugs
were triggered and hence detected. Importantly, it is possible that the fuzzer produces crashing
inputs that do not correspond to any injected bug. If this occurs, the new bug is triaged and added
to the benchmark for other fuzzers to discover.

5     DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION DECISIONS
Magma’s unapologetic focus on fuzzing (as opposed to being a general bug-detection benchmark)
necessitates a number of key design and implementation choices. We discuss these choices here.

5.1    Forward-Porting
   5.1.1 Forward-Porting vs. Back-Porting. In contrast to back-porting bugs to previous versions,
forward-porting ensures that all known bugs are fixed, and that the reintroduced bugs will have
ground-truth oracles. While it is possible that the new fixes and features in newer codebases may
(re)introduce unknown bugs, forward-porting allows Magma to evolve with each published bug fix.
Additionally, future code changes may render a forward-ported bug obsolete, or make its trigger
conditions unsatisfiable. Without verification, forward-porting may inject bugs which cannot be
triggered. We use fuzzing to reduce this possibility, reducing the cost of manually verifying injected
bugs. A fuzzer-generated PoV demonstrates that the bug is triggerable. Bugs that are discovered
this way are added to the list of verified bugs, helping the evaluation of other fuzzers. While this
approach may skew Magma towards fuzzer-discoverable bugs, we argue that this is a nonissue:
any newly-discovered PoV will update the benchmark, thus ensuring a fair and balanced bug
distribution.

                    Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
49:12                                                                                              A. Hazimeh, et al.

    5.1.2 Manual Forward-Porting. All Magma bugs are manually introduced. This process involves:
(i) searching for bug reports; (ii) identifying bugs that affect the core codebase; (iii) finding the
relevant fix commits; (iv) recognizing the bug conditions from the fix commits; (v) collecting these
conditions as a set of path constraints; (vi) modeling these path constraints as a boolean expression
(the bug canary); and (vii) injecting these canaries to flag bugs at runtime. The complexity of
this process led us to reject a wholly-automated approach; automating bug injection would likely
result in an incomplete and error-prone technique, ultimately yielding fewer bugs of lower quality.
Moreover, an automated approach still requires manual verification of the results. Dedicating
human resources to the forward-porting process maximizes the correctness of Magma’s bugs.
    To justify a manual approach, we enumerate the scopes (i.e., code blocks, functions, modules)
spanned by each bug fix and use these scopes as a measure of bug-porting complexity (scope
measures for all bugs are given in Table A1). While a simple bug-porting technique works well for
fixes with a scope of one, the bug-porting technique must become more advanced as the number of
scopes increases (e.g., it must handle interprocedural constraints). Of the 118 Magma bugs, 34 % had
a scope measure greater than one.
    Finally, our manual porting process was heavily reliant on prose; in particular, by the comments
and discussions contained within bug reports. These discussions provide valuable insight into
(a) developers’ intent, and (b) the construction of precise trigger conditions. Additionally, function
names (particularly those from the standard library) provide key insight into the code’s objective,
without requiring in-depth analysis into what each function does. An automated technique would
require either: (i) an in-depth analysis of such functions, likely resulting in path explosion; or
(ii) inference of bug conditions and function utilities via natural language processing (NLP). Both of
these approaches are too complex to be included in the scope of Magma’s development and would
likely require several years of research to be effective.

5.2     Weird States
When a fuzzer generates an input that triggers an undetected bug, and execution continues past
this bug, the program transitions into an undefined state: a weird state [15]. Any information
collected after transitioning to a weird state is unreliable. To address this issue, we allow the fuzzer
to continue the execution trace, but only collect bug oracle data before and until the first bug is
triggered (i.e., transition to a weird state). Oracles do not signify that a bug has been executed; they
only indicate whether the conditions required to execute a bug are satisfied.
   Listing 1 shows an example of the interplay between weird states. This example contains two
bugs: an out-of-bounds write (bug 1) and a division-by-zero (bug 2). When tmp.len == 0, the
condition for bug 1 (line 6) remains unsatisfied, logging and triggering bug 2 instead (lines 8
and 9, respectively). However, when tmp.len > 16, bug 1 is logged and triggered (lines 5 and 6,


                     1 void libfoo_baz ( char * str ) {
                     2   struct { char buf [16]; size_t len ; } tmp ;
                     3   tmp . len = strlen ( str );
                     4   // Bug 1: possible OOB write in strcpy ()
                     5   magma_log (1 , tmp . len >= sizeof ( tmp . buf ));
                     6   strcpy ( tmp . buf , str );
                     7   // Bug 2: possible div -by - zero if tmp . len == 0
                     8   magma_log (2 , tmp . len == 0) ;
                     9   int repeat = 64 / tmp . len ;
                    10   int padlen = 64 % tmp . len ;
                    11 }

Listing 1. Weird states can result in execution traces which do not exist in the context of normal program
behavior.


Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark                                                                      49:13

respectively). Furthermore, tmp.len is overwritten by a non-zero value, leaving bug 2 untriggered.
In contrast, bug 1 is triggered when tmp.len == 16, overwriting tmp.len with the NULL terminator
and setting its value to 0 (on a Little-Endian system). This also triggers bug 2, despite the input not
explicitly specifying a zero-length str.

5.3   A Static Benchmark
Much like other widely-used performance benchmarks—e.g., SPEC CPU [57] and DaCapo [7]—
Magma is a static benchmark that contains realistic workloads. These benchmarks assume that if
the system-under-test performs well on the benchmark’s workloads, then it will perform similarly
on real workloads. While realistic, static benchmarks are susceptible to overfitting. Overfitting can
occur if developers tweak the system-under-test to perform better on a benchmark, rather than
focusing on real workloads.
   Overfitting could be overcome by dynamically synthesizing a benchmark (and ensuring that the
system-under-test is unaware of the synthesis parameters). However, this approach risks generating
workloads different from real-world scenarios, rendering the evaluation biased and/or incomplete.
While program synthesis is a well-studied topic [6, 23, 26], it remains difficult to generate large
programs that remain faithful to real development patterns and styles.
   To prevent overfitting, Magma’s forward-porting process allows targets to be updated as they
evolve in the real-world. Each forward-ported bug requires minimal code changes: the addition of
Magma’s instrumentation and the faulty code itself. This makes it relatively straightforward to
update targets, including introducing new bugs and new features. For example, two undergraduate
students without software security experience added over 60 bugs in three new targets over a single
semester. These measures ensure that Magma remains representative of real, complex targets and
suitable for fuzzer evaluation.

5.4   Leaky Oracles
Introducing oracles into the benchmark may leak information that interferes with a fuzzer’s
exploration capability, potentially leading to overfitting (as discussed in Section 5.3). For example,
if oracles were implemented as if statements, fuzzers that maximize branch coverage could detect
the oracle’s branch and hence generate an input that satisifies the branch condition.
   One possible solution to this leaky oracle problem is to produce both instrumented and unin-
strumented target binaries (with respect to Magma’s instrumentation, not any instrumentation
that the fuzzer injects). The fuzzer’s input would be fed into both binaries, but the fuzzer would
only collect the data it needs (e.g., coverage feedback) from the uninstrumented binary. The in-
strumented binary would collect canary data and report it to the runtime monitor. This approach,
however, introduces other challenges associated with duplicating the execution trace between
two binaries (e.g., replicating the environment, maintaining synchronization between executions),
greatly complicating Magma’s implementation and introducing runtime overheads.
   Instead, we use always-evaluate memory writes, whereby an injected bug oracle evaluates a
boolean expression representing the bug’s trigger condition. This typically involves a binary
comparison operator, which most compilers (e.g., gcc, clang) translate into a pair of cmp and set
instructions embedded into the execution path. The results of this evaluation are then shared with
the runtime monitor (Section 4.4). This process is demonstrated in Listings 2 and 3.
   Listing 2 shows Magma’s canary implementation. The always-evaluated memory accesses are
shown on lines 4 and 5. The faulty flag addresses the problem of weird states (Section 5.2), and
disables future canaries after the first bug is encountered.
   Listing 3 shows an example program instrumented with a canary. A call to magma_log is inserted
(line 3) prior to the execution of the faulty code (line 5). Compound trigger conditions—i.e., those

                    Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
  49:14                                                                                              A. Hazimeh, et al.

1 void magma_log ( int id , bool condition ) {                         1 void libfoo_bar () {
2   extern struct magma_bug * bugs ; // = mmap (...)                   2   // uint32_t a , b , c;
3   extern bool faulty ; // = false initially                          3   magma_log (42 , (a == 0) | (b == 0) );
4   bugs [ id ]. reached   += 1         & ( faulty ^ 1) ;              4   // possible divide -by - zero
5   bugs [ id ]. triggered += condition & ( faulty ^ 1) ;              5   uint32_t x = c / (a * b);
6   faulty = faulty | condition ;                                      6 }
7 }
                                                                               Listing 3. Instrumented example.
              Listing 2. Magma instrumentation.



  including the logical and and or operators—often generate implicit branches at compile-time (due
  to short-circuit compiler behavior). To avoid leaking information through coverage, we provide
  custom x86-64 assembly blocks to evaluate these logical operators in a single basic block (without
  short-circuit behavior). We revert to C’s bitwise operators (& and |)—which are more brittle and
  susceptible to safety-agnostic compiler passes [56]—when the compilation target is not x86-64.
     Although this approach may introduce memory access patterns that are detectable by taint
  tracking and other data-flow analysis techniques, statistical tests can be used to infer whether the
  fuzzer overfits to these access patterns. By repeating the fuzzing campaign with the uninstrumented
  binary, we can verify if the results vary significantly.

  5.5     Proofs of Vulnerability
  In order to increase confidence in the injected bugs, a proof of vulnerability (PoV) input must be
  supplied for every bug, verifying that the bug can be triggered. The process of manually crafting
  PoVs, however, is arduous and requires domain-specific knowledge, both about the input format
  and the target program, potentially bringing the bug-injection process to a grinding halt.
     When available, we extract PoVs from public bug reports. When no PoV is available, we launch
  multiple fuzzing campaigns against these targets in an attempt to trigger each injected bug. Inputs
  that trigger a bug are saved as a PoV. Bugs which are not triggered, even after multiple campaigns,
  are manually inspected to verify path reachability and satisfiability of trigger conditions.

  5.6     Unknown Bugs
  Because Magma uses real-world programs, it is possible that bugs exist for which no ground-truth
  is available (i.e., an oracle does not exist). A fuzzer might inadvertantly trigger these bugs and
  (correctly) detect a fault. Due to the imperfections in automated deduplication techniques, these
  crashes are not included in Magma’s metrics. Instead, such crashes are used to improve Magma
  itself. The bug’s root cause can be determined by manually studying the execution trace, after
  which the bug can be added to the benchmark.

  5.7     Fuzzer Compatibility
  Fuzzers are not limited to a specific execution engine under which they analyze and explore a
  program. For example, some fuzzers (e.g., Driller [58], T-Fuzz [44]) leverage symbolic execution
  (using an engine such as angr [54]) to explore the target. This can introduce (a) incompatibilities
  with Magma’s instrumentation, and (b) inconsistencies in the runtime environment (depending on
  how the symbolic execution engine models the environment).
    However, the defining trait of most fuzzers, in contrast to other types of bug-finding tools, is
  that they concretely execute the target on the host system. Unlike benchmarks such as the CGC
  and BugBench—which aim to evaluate all bug-finding tools—Magma is unapologetically a fuzzing
  benchmark. This includes whitebox fuzzers that use symbolic execution to guide input generation,
  provided that the target is executed on the host system (SymCC [49] is one such fuzzer that we
  include in our evaluation).

  Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark                                                                       49:15

   We therefore impose the following restriction on the fuzzers evaluated by Magma: the fuzzer
must execute the target in the context of an OS process, with unrestricted access to OS facilities
(e.g., system calls, libraries, file system). This allows Magma’s runtime monitor to extract canary
statistics using the operating system’s services at relatively low overhead/complexity.

6     EVALUATION
6.1    Methodology
We evaluated several fuzzers in order to establish the versatility of our metrics and benchmark
suite. We chose a set of seven mutational fuzzers whose source code was available at the time
of writing: AFL [66], AFLFast [10], AFL++ [16], FairFuzz [31], MOpt-AFL [37], honggfuzz [21],
and SymCC-AFL [49]. These seven fuzzers were evaluated over ten identical 24 h and 7 d fuzzing
campaigns for each fuzzer/target combination. This amounts to 200,000 CPU-hours of fuzzing.
   To ensure fairness, benchmark parameters were identical across all fuzzing campaigns. Each
fuzzer was bootstrapped with the same set of seed files (sourced from the original target codebase)
and configured with the same timeout and memory limits. Magma’s monitoring utility was config-
ured to poll canary information every five seconds, and fatal canaries mode (Section 4) was used
to evaluate a fuzzer’s ability to reach and trigger bugs. All experiments were run on one of three
machines, each with an Intel® Xeon® Gold 5218 CPU and 64 GB of RAM, running Ubuntu 18.04
LTS 64-bit. The targets were compiled for x86-64.
   AddressSanitizer (ASan) [53] was used to evaluate detected bugs. Crashing inputs (generated by
fatal canaries) were validated by replaying them through the ASan-instrumented target. Although
this evaluation method measures ASan’s fault-detection capabilities, it still highlights the bugs that
fuzzers can realistically detect when fuzzing without ground truth.

6.2    Time to Bug
We use the time required to find a bug as a measure of fuzzer performance. As discussed in
Section 4.3, Magma records the time taken to both reach and trigger a bug, allowing us to compare
fuzzer performance across multiple dimensions. Fuzzing campaigns are typically limited to a finite
duration (we limit our campaigns to 24 h and 7 d, repeated ten times), so it is important that the
time-to-bug discovery is low.
   The highly-stochastic nature of fuzzing means that the time-to-bug can vary wildly between
identical trials. To account for this variation, we repeat each trial ten times. Despite this repetition,
a fuzzer may still fail to find a bug within the alloted time, leading to missing measurements. We
therefore apply survival analysis to account for this missing data and high variation in bug discovery
times. Specifically, we adopt Wagner’s approach [61] and use the Kaplan-Meier estimator [28] to
model a bug’s survival function. This survival function describes the probability that a bug remains
undiscovered (i.e., “survives”) within a given time (here, 24 h and 7 d trials). A smaller survival time
indicates better fuzzer performance.

6.3    Experimental Results
Figure 3, Figure 4, Table A2, and Table A3 present the results of our fuzzing campaigns.
   6.3.1 Bug Count and Statistical Significance. Figure 3 shows the mean number of bugs found per
fuzzer (across ten 24 h campaigns). These values are susceptible to outliers, limiting the conclusions
that we can draw about fuzzer performance. We therefore conducted a statistical significance
analysis of the collected sample-set pairs to calculate p-values using the Mann-Whitney U-test.
P-values provide a measure of how different a pair of sample sets are, and how significant these
differences are. Because our results are collected from independent populations (i.e., different

                     Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
49:16                                                                                              A. Hazimeh, et al.




Fig. 3. The mean number of bugs (and standard deviation) found by each fuzzer across ten 24 h campaigns.




Fig. 4. Significance of evaluations of fuzzer pairs using p-values from the Mann-Whitney U-Test. We use
𝑝 < 0.05 as a threshold for significance. Values greater than 0.05 are shaded red. Darker shading indicates a
lower p-value, or higher statistical significance. White cells indicate that the pair of sample sets are identical.


fuzzers), we make no assumptions about their distributions. Hence, we apply the Mann-Whitney
U-test to measure statistical significance. Figure 4 shows the results of this analysis.
   The Mann-Whitney U-test shows that AFL, AFLFast, AFL++, and SymCC-AFL performed similarly
against most targets (signified by the large number of red and white cells in Figure 4), despite some
minor differences in mean bug counts (shown in Figure 3). Figure 4 shows that, in most cases, the
small fluctuations in mean bug counts are not significant, and the results are thus not sufficiently
conclusive. One oddity is the performance of AFL++ against libtiff. Figure 3 reveals that AFL++
scored the highest mean bug count compared to all other fuzzers, and Figure 4 shows that this
difference is statistically significant.
   On the other hand, FairFuzz [31] displayed significant performance regression against libxml2,
openssl, and php. While the original evaluation of FairFuzz claims that it achieved the highest
coverage against xmllint, that improvement was not reflected in our results.
   Finally, honggfuzz and MOpt-AFL performed significantly better than all other fuzzers in three
out of seven targets. Additionally, honggfuzz was the best fuzzer for libpng as well. We attribute
honggfuzz’s performance to its wrapping of memory-comparison functions, which provides com-
parison progress information to the fuzzer (similar to Steelix [32]).
   6.3.2 Time to Bug. In total, during the 24 h campaigns, 74 of the 118 Magma bugs (62 %) were
reached. Additionally, 43 of the 54 verified bugs (79 %)—i.e., those with PoVs—were triggered.
Notably, no single fuzzer triggered more than 37 bugs (68 % of the verified bugs). These results are
presented in Table A2. Here, bugs are sorted by the mean trigger time, which we use to approximate
“difficulty”.

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark                                                                        49:17




 (a) Bug AAH018 (libtiff with read_rgba_fuzzer).               (b) Bug JCH232 (sqlite3 with sqlite3_fuzz).




       (c) Bug AAH020 (libtiff with tiffcp).               (d) Bug AAH020 (libtiff with read_rgba_fuzzer).
Fig. 5. Survival functions for a subset of Magma bugs. The 𝑦-axis is the survival probability for the given bug.
Dotted lines represent survival functions for reached bugs, while solid lines represent survival functions for
triggered bugs. Confidence intervals are shown as shaded regions.


   The long bug discovery times (19 of the 43 triggered bugs—44 %—took on average more than 20 h
to trigger) suggests that the evaluated fuzzers still have a long way to go in improving program
exploration. However, while many of the Magma bugs are difficult to discover, Table A2 highlights
a set of 17 “simple” bugs that all fuzzers find consistently within 24 h. These bugs provide a baseline
for detecting performance regression: if a new fuzzer fails to discover these bugs, then its program
exploration strategy should be revisited.
   Most of the bugs in Table A2 were reached by all fuzzers. SymCC-AFL was the worst performing
fuzzer in this regard, failing to reach nine bugs (the highest amongst the seven evaluated fuzzers).
Interestingly, most bugs show a large difference between reach and trigger times. For example,
only the first three bugs listed in Table A2 were triggered when first reached. In contrast, bugs
such as MAE115 (from openssl) take 10 s to reach (by all fuzzers), but up to 20 h (on average) to
trigger. This difference between time-to-reach and time-to-trigger a bug provides another feature
for determining bug “difficulty”: while control flow may be trivially satisfied (as evidence by the
time to reach a bug), bugs such as MAE115 may require complex, stateful data-flow constraints.
   The longer, 7 d campaigns in Table A3 reveal a peculiar result: while honggfuzz was faster to
trigger bugs during the 24 h campaigns, MOpt-AFL was faster to trigger 11 additional bugs after
24 h, making it the most successful fuzzer over the 7 d campaigns. Notably, honggfuzz failed to
trigger any of these 11 bugs. This highlights the importance of long fuzzing campaigns and the
utility of Magma’s survival time analysis for comparing fuzzer performance.

                      Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
49:18                                                                                              A. Hazimeh, et al.

   Figure 5 plots four survival functions for three Magma bugs (AAH018, JCH232, and AAH020).
These plots illustrate the probability of a bug surviving a 24 h fuzzing trial, and are generated
by applying the Kaplan-Meier estimator to the results of ten repeated fuzzing trials. Dotted lines
represent survival functions for reached bugs, while solid lines represent survival functions for
triggered bugs. Confidence intervals are shown as shaded regions. Figure 5a shows the time to
reach bug AAH018 (libtiff ). Notably, this bug was not triggered by any of the seven evaluated
fuzzers. Thus, the probability of bug AAH018 “surviving” 24 h (i.e., not being triggered) remains
at one. In comparison, Figure 5b shows the differences in the time taken to reach and trigger bug
JCH232 (sqlite3). Here, honggfuzz is the best performer, because the bug’s probability of survival
approaches zero the fastest. Notably, the variance is much higher compared to bug AAH018 (as
evident by the larger confidence intervals). Finally, Figure 5d and Figure 5c compare the probability
of survival for bug AAH020 (libtiff ) across two driver programs: tiffcp and read_rgba_fuzzer.
The former is a general-purpose application, while the latter is a driver specifically designed as a
fuzzer harness. While the bug is reached relatively quickly by both drivers, the fuzzer harness is
clearly superior at triggering the bug, as it is faster across all fuzzers. This result supports our claim
in Section 4.1 that domain experts are most suitable for selecting and developing fuzzing drivers.
   Again, it is clear that honggfuzz outperforms all other fuzzers (in both reaching and triggering
bugs), finding 11 additional bugs not triggered by other fuzzers. In addition to its finer-grained
instrumentation, honggfuzz natively supports persistent fuzzing. Our experiments show that
honggfuzz’s execution rate was at least three times higher than that of AFL-based fuzzers using
persistent drivers. This undoubtedly contributes to honggfuzz’s strong performance.

                              1 void png_check_chunk_length ( png_ptr , length ) {
                              2   size_t row_factor = png_ptr -> width // uint32_t
                              3     * png_ptr -> channels // uint32_t
                              4     * ( png_ptr -> bit_depth > 8? 2: 1)
                              5     + 1
                              6     + ( png_ptr -> interlaced ? 6: 0) ;
                              7
                              8   if ( png_ptr -> height > UINT_32_MAX / row_factor ) {
                              9     idat_limit = UINT_31_MAX ;
                             10   }
                             11 }

  Listing 4. Divide-by-zero bug in libpng. Input undergoes non-trivial transformations to trigger the bug.



   6.3.3 Achilles’ Heel of Mutational Fuzzing. AAH001 (CVE-2018-13785, shown in Listing 4), is a
divide-by-zero bug in libpng. It is triggered when the input is a non-interlaced 8-bit RGB image
with a width of 0x55555555. This “magic value” is not encoded anywhere in the target, and is
easily calculated by solving the constraints for row_factor == 0. However, mutational fuzzers
struggle to discover this bug type. This is because mutational fuzzers sample from an extremely
large input space, making them unlikely to pick the exact byte sequence required to trigger the
bug (here, 0x55555555). Notably, only honggfuzz, AFL, and SymCC-AFL were able to trigger this
bug. SymCC-AFL was the fastest to do so, likely due to its constraint-solving capabilities.
   6.3.4 Magic Value Identification. AAH007 is a dangling pointer bug in libpng, and illustrates
how some fuzzer features improve bug-finding ability. To trigger this bug, it is sufficient for a
fuzzer to provide a valid input with an eXIF chunk (which remains unmarked for release upon
object destruction, leading to a dangling pointer). Unlike the AFL-based fuzzers, honggfuzz is
able to consistently trigger this bug relatively early in each campaign. We posit that this is due
to honggfuzz replacing the strcmp function with an instrumented wrapper that incrementally

Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark                                                                       49:19

Table 3. Overheads introduced by LAVA-M compared to coreutils-8.24. These overheads denote increases
in LLVM IR instruction counts, object file sizes, and average runtimes when processing seeds generated from
a 24 h fuzzing campaign. The total number of unique bugs triggered across all 10 trials/fuzzer is also shown,
with the best performing fuzzer highlighted in green.

                       Overheads (%)                                    Total bugs triggered (#)
 Target    Bugs
                  LLVM IR   Size Runtime          afl aflfast   afl++    moptafl fairfuzz honggfuzz       symccafl
 base64      44       107.9     57.2        9.7    1        0     48          0          3           33           0
 md5sum      57        60.2     46.1        9.5    0        1     40          1          1           29           0
 uniq        28        63.6     27.8       11.6    3        0     29          1          0           13           3
 who       2136      1786.7   2409.1       42.9    1        1    819          1          1          750           1



satisfies string magic-value checks. SymCC-AFL also consistently triggers this bug, demonstrating
how whitebox fuzzers can trivially solve constraints based on magic values.

   6.3.5 Semantic Bug Detection. AAH003 (CVE-2015-8472) is a data inconsistency in libpng’s
API, where two references to the same piece of information (color-map size) can yield different
values. Such a semantic bug does not produce observable behavior that violates a known security
policy, and it cannot be detected by state-of-the-art sanitizers without a specification of expected
behavior.
   Semantic bugs are not always benign. Privilege escalation and command injection are two of the
most security-critical logic bugs that are still found in modern systems, but they remain difficult
to detect with standard sanitization techniques. This observation highlights the shortcomings of
current fault detection mechanisms and the need for more fault-oriented bug-finding techniques
(e.g., NEZHA [45]).

  6.3.6 Comparison to LAVA-M. In addition to our Magma evaluation, we also evaluate the same
seven fuzzers against LAVA-M, measuring (a) the overheads introduced by LAVA-M’s bug oracles,
and (b) the total number of bugs found by each fuzzer (across a 24 h campaign, repeated 10 times
per fuzzer). These results—presented in Table 3—show that LAVA-M’s most iconic target, who,
accounts for 94.3 % of the benchmark’s bugs. This high bug count reduces the amount of functional
code (compared to benchmark instrumentation) in the who binary to 5.3 %, impeding a fuzzer’s
exploration capabilities. Notably, we found that the evaluated fuzzers spent (on average) 42.9 % of
their time executing oracle code in who (this percentage is based on the final state of the fuzzing
queue, and may not represent the runtime overhead of all code paths). Finally, the bug counts
found by each fuzzer show a clear bias towards fuzzers with magic-value detection capabilities
(due to LAVA-M’s single, simple bug type, per Section 2.2.1).

6.4   Discussion
   6.4.1 Ground Truth and Confidence. Ground truth enables us to determine a crash’s root cause.
Unlike many existing benchmarks, Magma provides straightforward access to ground truth. While
ground truth is available for all 118 bugs, only 45 % of these bugs have a PoV that demonstrate
triggerability. Importantly, only bugs with PoVs can be used to confidently measure a fuzzer’s
performance. Regardless, bugs without a PoV remain useful: any fuzzer evaluated against Magma
can produce a PoV, increasing the benchmark’s utility. Widespread adoption of Magma will increase
the number of bugs with PoVs. Notably, Table A3 shows that running the benchmark for longer
indeed yields more PoVs for previously-untriggered bugs. We leave it as an open challenge to
generate PoVs for these bugs.

                     Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
49:20                                                                                              A. Hazimeh, et al.

   6.4.2 Beyond Crashes. While Magma’s instrumentation does not collect information about
detected bugs (detection is a characteristic of the fuzzer, not the bug itself), it does enable the
evaluation of this metric through a post-processing step (supported by fatal canaries).
   In particular, bugs should not be restricted to crash-triggering faults. For example, some bugs
result in resource starvation (e.g., unbounded loops or mallocs), privilege escalation, or unde-
sirable outputs. Importantly, fuzzer developers recognize the need for additional bug-detection
mechanisms: AFL has a hang timeout, and SlowFuzz searches for inputs that trigger worst-case
behavior. Excluding non-crashing bugs from an evaluation leads to an under-approximation of real
bugs. Their inclusion, however, enables better bug detection tools. Evaluating fuzzers based on
bugs reached, triggered, and detected allows us to classify fuzzers and compare different approaches
along multiple dimensions (e.g., bugs reached allows for an evaluation of path exploration, while
bugs triggered and detected allows for an evaluation of a fuzzer’s constraint generation/solving
capabilities). It also allows us to identify which bug classes continue to evade state-of-the-art
sanitization techniques (and to what degree).
   6.4.3 Magma as a Lasting Benchmark. Magma leverages software with a long history of security
bugs to build an extensible framework with ground truth knowledge. Like most benchmarks, the
widespread adoption of Magma defines its utility. Benchmarks provide a common basis through
which systems are evaluated and compared. For instance, the community continues to use LAVA-M
to evaluate and compare fuzzers, despite the fact that most of its bugs have been found, and that
these bugs are of a single, synthetic type. Magma aims to provide an evaluation platform that
incorporates realistic bugs in real software.

7   CONCLUSIONS
Magma is an open ground-truth fuzzing benchmark that enables accurate and consistent fuzzer eval-
uation and performance comparison. We designed and implemented Magma to provide researchers
with a benchmark containing real targets with real bugs. We achieve this by forward-porting 118
bugs across seven diverse targets. However, this is only the beginning. Magma’s simple design
and implementation allows it to be easily improved, updated, and extended, making it ideal for
open-source collaborative development and contribution. Increased adoption will only strengthen
Magma’s value, and thus we encourage fuzzer developers to incorporate their fuzzers into Magma.
   We evaluated Magma against seven popular open-source mutation-based fuzzers (AFL, AFLFast,
AFL++, FairFuzz, MOpt-AFL, honggfuzz, and SymCC-AFL). Our evaluation shows that ground
truth enables systematic comparison of fuzzer performance. Our evaluation provides tangible
insight into fuzzer performance, why crash counts are often misleading, and how randomness
affects fuzzer performance. It also brought to light the shortcomings of some existing fault detection
methods used by fuzzers.
   Despite best practices, evaluating fuzz testing remains challenging. With the adoption of ground-
truth benchmarks like Magma, fuzzer evaluation will become reproducible, allowing researchers to
showcase the true contributions of new fuzzing approaches. Magma is open-source and available
at https://hexhive.epfl.ch/magma/.

REFERENCES
 [1] Kayla Afanador and Cynthia Irvine. 2020. Representativeness in the Benchmark for Vulnerability Analysis Tools
     (B-VAT). In 13th USENIX Workshop on Cyber Security Experimentation and Test (CSET 20). USENIX Association.
     https://www.usenix.org/conference/cset20/presentation/afanador
 [2] Mike Aizatsky, Kostya Serebryany, Oliver Chang, Abhishek Arya, and Meredith Whittaker. 2016. Announc-
     ing OSS-Fuzz: Continuous fuzzing for open source software.         https://opensource.googleblog.com/2016/12/
     announcing-oss-fuzz-continuous-fuzzing.html. Accessed: 2019-09-09.


Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark                                                                               49:21

 [3] Branden Archer and Darkkey. [n.d.]. radamsa: A Black-box mutational fuzzer. https://gitlab.com/akihe/radamsa.
     Accessed: 2019-09-09.
 [4] Brad Arkin. 2009. Adobe Reader and Acrobat Security Initiative. http://blogs.adobe.com/security/2009/05/adobe_
     reader_and_acrobat_secur.html. Accessed: 2019-09-09.
 [5] Abhishek Arya and Cris Neckar. 2012. Fuzzing for security. https://blog.chromium.org/2012/04/fuzzing-for-security.
     html. Accessed: 2019-09-09.
 [6] Domagoj Babic, Stefan Bucur, Yaohui Chen, Franjo Ivancic, Tim King, Markus Kusano, Caroline Lemieux, László
     Szekeres, and Wei Wang. 2019. FUDGE: Fuzz Driver Generation at Scale. In Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM Joint
     Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering.
 [7] Stephen M. Blackburn, Robin Garner, Chris Hoffmann, Asjad M. Khang, Kathryn S. McKinley, Rotem Bentzur, Amer
     Diwan, Daniel Feinberg, Daniel Frampton, Samuel Z. Guyer, Martin Hirzel, Antony Hosking, Maria Jump, Han
     Lee, J. Eliot B. Moss, Aashish Phansalkar, Darko Stefanović, Thomas VanDrunen, Daniel von Dincklage, and Ben
     Wiedermann. 2006. The DaCapo Benchmarks: Java Benchmarking Development and Analysis. In Proceedings of
     the 21st Annual ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented Programming Systems, Languages, and Applications
     (Portland, Oregon, USA) (OOPSLA ’06). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 169–190. https:
     //doi.org/10.1145/1167473.1167488
 [8] Tim Blazytko, Moritz Schlögel, Cornelius Aschermann, Ali Abbasi, Joel Frank, Simon Wörner, and Thorsten Holz.
     2020. AURORA: Statistical Crash Analysis for Automated Root Cause Explanation. In 29th USENIX Security Sym-
     posium (USENIX Security 20). USENIX Association, 235–252. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity20/
     presentation/blazytko
 [9] Marcel Böhme and Brandon Falk. 2020. Fuzzing: On the Exponential Cost of Vulnerability Discovery. In Proceedings of
     the 2020 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of
     Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE 2020). ACM, New York, NY, USA. https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409729
[10] Marcel Böhme, Van-Thuan Pham, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2016. Coverage-based Greybox Fuzzing As Markov Chain.
     In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (Vienna, Austria) (CCS
     ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1032–1043. https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978428
[11] Brian Caswell. [n.d.]. Cyber Grand Challenge Corpus. http://www.lungetech.com/cgc-corpus/.
[12] P. Chen and H. Chen. 2018. Angora: Efficient Fuzzing by Principled Search. In 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and
     Privacy (SP). IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 711–725. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2018.00046
[13] N. Coppik, O. Schwahn, and N. Suri. 2019. MemFuzz: Using Memory Accesses to Guide Fuzzing. In 2019 12th IEEE
     Conference on Software Testing, Validation and Verification (ICST). 48–58. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICST.2019.00015
[14] B. Dolan-Gavitt, P. Hulin, E. Kirda, T. Leek, A. Mambretti, W. Robertson, F. Ulrich, and R. Whelan. 2016. LAVA:
     Large-Scale Automated Vulnerability Addition. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). 110–121. https:
     //doi.org/10.1109/SP.2016.15
[15] T. Dullien. 2020. Weird Machines, Exploitability, and Provable Unexploitability. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics
     in Computing 8, 2 (2020), 391–403.
[16] Andrea Fioraldi, Dominik Maier, Heiko Eißfeldt, and Marc Heuse. 2020. AFL++ : Combining Incremental Steps
     of Fuzzing Research. In 14th USENIX Workshop on Offensive Technologies (WOOT 20). USENIX Association. https:
     //www.usenix.org/conference/woot20/presentation/fioraldi Accessed: 2020-10-19.
[17] Vijay Ganesh, Tim Leek, and Martin C. Rinard. 2009. Taint-based directed whitebox fuzzing. In 31st International
     Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2009, May 16-24, 2009, Vancouver, Canada, Proceedings. IEEE, 474–484.
     https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2009.5070546
[18] Patrice Godefroid, Adam Kiezun, and Michael Y. Levin. 2008. Grammar-based whitebox fuzzing. In Proceedings of the
     ACM SIGPLAN 2008 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, Tucson, AZ, USA, June 7-13,
     2008, Rajiv Gupta and Saman P. Amarasinghe (Eds.). ACM, 206–215. https://doi.org/10.1145/1375581.1375607
[19] Google. [n.d.]. FuzzBench. https://google.github.io/fuzzbench/. Accessed: 2020-05-02.
[20] Google. [n.d.]. Fuzzer Test Suite. https://github.com/google/fuzzer-test-suite. Accessed: 2019-09-06.
[21] Google. [n.d.]. honggfuzz. http://honggfuzz.com/. Accessed: 2019-10-19.
[22] Gustavo Grieco, Martín Ceresa, and Pablo Buiras. 2016. QuickFuzz: an automatic random fuzzer for common file
     formats. In Proceedings of the 9th International Symposium on Haskell, Haskell 2016, Nara, Japan, September 22-23, 2016,
     Geoffrey Mainland (Ed.). ACM, 13–20. https://doi.org/10.1145/2976002.2976017
[23] Sumit Gulwani. 2010. Dimensions in Program Synthesis. In Proceedings of the 12th International ACM SIGPLAN
     Symposium on Principles and Practice of Declarative Programming (Hagenberg, Austria) (PPDP ’10). Association for
     Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 13–24. https://doi.org/10.1145/1836089.1836091
[24] John L. Henning. 2000. SPEC CPU2000: Measuring CPU Performance in the New Millennium. Computer 33, 7 (July
     2000), 28–35. https://doi.org/10.1109/2.869367



                        Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
49:22                                                                                               A. Hazimeh, et al.

[25] Intel. [n.d.]. Intel Pin API Reference. https://software.intel.com/sites/landingpage/pintool/docs/71313/Pin/html/index.
     html.
[26] Kyriakos K. Ispoglou. 2020. FuzzGen: Automatic Fuzzer Generation. In Proceedings of the USENIX Conference on Security
     Symposium.
[27] Ajay Joshi, Aashish Phansalkar, L. Eeckhout, and L. K. John. 2006. Measuring benchmark similarity using inherent
     program characteristics. IEEE Trans. Comput. 55, 6 (2006), 769–782.
[28] Edward L Kaplan and Paul Meier. 1958. Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations. Journal of the
     American statistical association 53, 282 (1958), 457–481.
[29] V. Kashyap, J. Ruchti, L. Kot, E. Turetsky, R. Swords, S. A. Pan, J. Henry, D. Melski, and E. Schulte. 2019. Automated
     Customized Bug-Benchmark Generation. In 2019 19th International Working Conference on Source Code Analysis and
     Manipulation (SCAM). 103–114.
[30] George Klees, Andrew Ruef, Benji Cooper, Shiyi Wei, and Michael Hicks. 2018. Evaluating Fuzz Testing. In Proceedings
     of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (Toronto, Canada) (CCS ’18). ACM,
     New York, NY, USA, 2123–2138. https://doi.org/10.1145/3243734.3243804
[31] Caroline Lemieux and Koushik Sen. 2018. FairFuzz: a targeted mutation strategy for increasing greybox fuzz testing
     coverage. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE 2018,
     Montpellier, France, September 3-7, 2018, Marianne Huchard, Christian Kästner, and Gordon Fraser (Eds.). ACM, 475–485.
     https://doi.org/10.1145/3238147.3238176
[32] Yuekang Li, Bihuan Chen, Mahinthan Chandramohan, Shang-Wei Lin, Yang Liu, and Alwen Tiu. 2017. Steelix: Program-
     State Based Binary Fuzzing. In Proceedings of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering
     (Paderborn, Germany) (ESEC/FSE 2017). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 627–637. https:
     //doi.org/10.1145/3106237.3106295
[33] Yuwei Li, Shouling Ji, Yuan Chen, Sizhuang Liang, Wei-Han Lee, Yueyao Chen, Chenyang Lyu, Chunming Wu, Raheem
     Beyah, Peng Cheng, Kangjie Lu, and Ting Wang. 2021. UNIFUZZ: A Holistic and Pragmatic Metrics-Driven Platform
     for Evaluating Fuzzers. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21). USENIX Association.
[34] LLVM Foundation. [n.d.]. libFuzzer. https://llvm.org/docs/LibFuzzer.html. Accessed: 2019-09-06.
[35] Shan Lu, Zhenmin Li, Feng Qin, Lin Tan, Pin Zhou, and Yuanyuan Zhou. 2005. Bugbench: Benchmarks for evaluating
     bug detection tools. In In Workshop on the Evaluation of Software Defect Detection Tools.
[36] Chi-Keung Luk, Robert Cohn, Robert Muth, Harish Patil, Artur Klauser, Geoff Lowney, Steven Wallace, Vijay Janapa
     Reddi, and Kim Hazelwood. 2005. Pin: Building Customized Program Analysis Tools with Dynamic Instrumentation.
     In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Chicago,
     IL, USA) (PLDI ’05). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 190–200. https://doi.org/10.1145/
     1065010.1065034
[37] Chenyang Lyu, Shouling Ji, Chao Zhang, Yuwei Li, Wei-Han Lee, Yu Song, and Raheem Beyah. 2019. MOPT: Optimized
     Mutation Scheduling for Fuzzers. In 28th USENIX Security Symposium, USENIX Security 2019, Santa Clara, CA, USA,
     August 14-16, 2019., Nadia Heninger and Patrick Traynor (Eds.). USENIX Association, 1949–1966. https://www.usenix.
     org/conference/usenixsecurity19/presentation/lyu
[38] Valentin J. M. Manès, HyungSeok Han, Choongwoo Han, Sang Kil Cha, Manuel Egele, Edward J. Schwartz, and Maverick
     Woo. 2019. The Art, Science, and Engineering of Fuzzing: A Survey. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2019).
     https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2019.2946563
[39] Valentin J. M. Manès, Soomin Kim, and Sang Kil Cha. 2020. Ankou: Guiding Grey-Box Fuzzing towards Combinatorial
     Difference. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering (Seoul, South Korea)
     (ICSE ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1024–1036. https://doi.org/10.1145/3377811.
     3380421
[40] MITRE. 2007. Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE). https://cwe.mitre.org/.
[41] Timothy Nosco, Jared Ziegler, Zechariah Clark, Davy Marrero, Todd Finkler, Andrew Barbarello, and W. Michael
     Petullo. 2020. The Industrial Age of Hacking. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20). USENIX
     Association, 1129–1146. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity20/presentation/nosco
[42] Peach Tech. [n.d.]. Peach Fuzzer Platform. https://www.peach.tech/products/peach-fuzzer/peach-platform/. Accessed:
     2019-09-09.
[43] Karl Pearson. 1901. LIII. On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space. The London, Edinburgh, and
     Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 2, 11 (1901), 559–572.
[44] H. Peng, Y. Shoshitaishvili, and M. Payer. 2018. T-Fuzz: Fuzzing by Program Transformation. In 2018 IEEE Symposium
     on Security and Privacy (SP). 697–710. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2018.00056
[45] T. Petsios, A. Tang, S. Stolfo, A. D. Keromytis, and S. Jana. 2017. NEZHA: Efficient Domain-Independent Differential
     Testing. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). 615–632. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2017.27



Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark                                                                               49:23

[46] Theofilos Petsios, Jason Zhao, Angelos D. Keromytis, and Suman Jana. 2017. SlowFuzz: Automated Domain-Independent
     Detection of Algorithmic Complexity Vulnerabilities. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
     and Communications Security (Dallas, Texas, USA) (CCS ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2155–2168. https://doi.org/10.
     1145/3133956.3134073
[47] Van-Thuan Pham, Marcel Böhme, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2016. Model-based whitebox fuzzing for program binaries.
     In Proceedings of the 31st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE 2016, Singapore,
     September 3-7, 2016, David Lo, Sven Apel, and Sarfraz Khurshid (Eds.). ACM, 543–553. https://doi.org/10.1145/2970276.
     2970316
[48] A. Phansalkar, A. Joshi, L. Eeckhout, and L. K. John. 2005. Measuring Program Similarity: Experiments with SPEC CPU
     Benchmark Suites. In IEEE International Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems and Software, 2005. ISPASS
     2005. 10–20.
[49] Sebastian Poeplau and Aurélien Francillon. 2020. Symbolic execution with SymCC: Don’t interpret, compile!. In 29th
     USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20). USENIX Association, 181–198. https://www.usenix.org/conference/
     usenixsecurity20/presentation/poeplau
[50] Aleksandar Prokopec, Andrea Rosà, David Leopoldseder, Gilles Duboscq, Petr Tůma, Martin Studener, Lubomír Bulej,
     Yudi Zheng, Alex Villazón, Doug Simon, Thomas Würthinger, and Walter Binder. 2019. Renaissance: Benchmarking
     Suite for Parallel Applications on the JVM. In Proceedings of the 40th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
     Language Design and Implementation (Phoenix, AZ, USA) (PLDI 2019). Association for Computing Machinery, New
     York, NY, USA, 31–47. https://doi.org/10.1145/3314221.3314637
[51] Tim Rains. 2012. Security Development Lifecycle: A Living Process. https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2012/
     02/01/security-development-lifecycle-a-living-process/. Accessed: 2019-09-09.
[52] Subhajit Roy, Awanish Pandey, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Yu Hu. 2018. Bug Synthesis: Challenging Bug-Finding
     Tools with Deep Faults. In Proceedings of the 2018 26th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference
     and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (Lake Buena Vista, FL, USA) (ESEC/FSE 2018). Association
     for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 224–234. https://doi.org/10.1145/3236024.3236084
[53] Konstantin Serebryany, Derek Bruening, Alexander Potapenko, and Dmitriy Vyukov. 2012. AddressSanitizer: A
     Fast Address Sanity Checker. In 2012 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, Boston, MA, USA, June 13-15, 2012, Ger-
     not Heiser and Wilson C. Hsieh (Eds.). USENIX Association, 309–318. https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc12/
     technical-sessions/presentation/serebryany
[54] Yan Shoshitaishvili, Ruoyu Wang, Christopher Salls, Nick Stephens, Mario Polino, Audrey Dutcher, John Grosen, Siji
     Feng, Christophe Hauser, Christopher Kruegel, and Giovanni Vigna. 2016. SoK: (State of) The Art of War: Offensive
     Techniques in Binary Analysis. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy.
[55] D. Song, J. Lettner, P. Rajasekaran, Y. Na, S. Volckaert, P. Larsen, and M. Franz. 2019. SoK: Sanitizing for Security. In
     2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). 1275–1295. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2019.00010
[56] Daan Sprenkels. [n.d.]. LLVM provides no side-channel resistance. https://dsprenkels.com/cmov-conversion.html.
     Accessed: 2020-02-13.
[57] Standard Performance Evaluation Corporation. [n.d.]. SPEC Benchmark Suite. https://www.spec.org/. Accessed:
     2020-02-12.
[58] Nick Stephens, John Grosen, Christopher Salls, Andrew Dutcher, Ruoyu Wang, Jacopo Corbetta, Yan Shoshitaishvili,
     Christopher Kruegel, and Giovanni Vigna. 2016. Driller: Augmenting Fuzzing Through Selective Symbolic Execution.
     In 23rd Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS 2016, San Diego, California, USA, February
     21-24, 2016. The Internet Society. http://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2016.23368
[59] Trail of Bits. [n.d.]. DARPA Challenge Binaries on Linux, OS X, and Windows. https://github.com/trailofbits/cb-multios/.
     Accessed: 2020-10-04.
[60] Jóakim v. Kistowski, Jeremy A. Arnold, Karl Huppler, Klaus-Dieter Lange, John L. Henning, and Paul Cao. 2015. How
     to Build a Benchmark. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM/SPEC International Conference on Performance Engineering (Austin,
     Texas, USA) (ICPE ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 333–336. https://doi.org/10.1145/
     2668930.2688819
[61] Jonas Benedict Wagner. 2017. Elastic Program Transformations Automatically Optimizing the Reliability/Performance
     Trade-off in Systems Software. (2017), 149. https://doi.org/10.5075/epfl-thesis-7745
[62] Junjie Wang, Bihuan Chen, Lei Wei, and Yang Liu. 2017. Skyfire: Data-Driven Seed Generation for Fuzzing. In 2017
     IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP 2017, San Jose, CA, USA, May 22-26, 2017. IEEE Computer Society, 579–594.
     https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2017.23
[63] Junjie Wang, Bihuan Chen, Lei Wei, and Yang Liu. 2019. Superion: grammar-aware greybox fuzzing. In Proceedings of
     the 41st International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2019, Montreal, QC, Canada, May 25-31, 2019, Joanne M.
     Atlee, Tevfik Bultan, and Jon Whittle (Eds.). IEEE / ACM, 724–735. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00081



                         Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
49:24                                                                                              A. Hazimeh, et al.

[64] Maverick Woo, Sang Kil Cha, Samantha Gottlieb, and David Brumley. 2013. Scheduling black-box mutational fuzzing. In
     2013 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS’13, Berlin, Germany, November 4-8, 2013,
     Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, Virgil D. Gligor, and Moti Yung (Eds.). ACM, 511–522. https://doi.org/10.1145/2508859.2516736
[65] Insu Yun, Sangho Lee, Meng Xu, Yeongjin Jang, and Taesoo Kim. 2018. QSYM: A Practical Concolic Execution Engine
     Tailored for Hybrid Fuzzing. In Proceedings of the 27th USENIX Conference on Security Symposium (Baltimore, MD,
     USA) (SEC’18). USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA, USA, 745–761. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3277203.3277260
[66] Michal Zalewski. [n.d.]. American Fuzzy Lop (AFL) Technical Whitepaper. http://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/afl/technical_
     details.txt. Accessed: 2019-09-06.




Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark                                                                                                                            49:25

A          BUGS AND REPORTS

Table A1. The bugs injected into Magma, and the original bug reports. Of the 118 bugs, 78 bugs (66%) have a
scope measure of one. Although most single-scope bugs can be ported with an automatic technique, relying
on such a technique would produce fewer and lower-quality canaries. PoVs of (∗)-marked bugs are sourced
from bug reports.
          Bug ID    Report               Class                               PoV Scopes             Bug ID   Report           Class                          PoV   Scopes
          AAH001    CVE-2018-13785       Integer overflow, divide by zero    ✓      1               AAH054   CVE-2016-2842    OOB write                      ✗       5
          AAH002∗   CVE-2019-7317        Use-after-free                      ✓      4               AAH055   CVE-2016-2108    OOB read                       ✓       5
          AAH003    CVE-2015-8472        API inconsistency                   ✓      2               AAH056   CVE-2016-6309    Use-after-free                         1
libpng




                                                                                                                                                             ✓
          AAH004    CVE-2015-0973        Integer overflow                    ✗      1               AAH057   CVE-2016-2109    Resource exhaustion (memory)   ✗       2
          AAH005∗   CVE-2014-9495        Integer overflow, Buffer overflow   ✓      1               AAH058   CVE-2016-2176    Stack buffer overread          ✗       2
          AAH007    (Unspecified)        Memory leak                         ✓      2               AAH059   CVE-2016-6304    Resource exhaustion (memory)   ✗       3
          AAH008    CVE-2013-6954        0-pointer dereference               ✓      2               MAE100   CVE-2016-2105    Integer overflow               ✗       1
          AAH009    CVE-2016-9535        Heap buffer overflow                ✓      1               MAE102   CVE-2016-6303    Integer overflow               ✗       1
          AAH010    CVE-2016-5314        Heap buffer overflow                ✓      1               MAE103   CVE-2017-3730    0-pointer dereference          ✗       1
          AAH011    CVE-2016-10266       Divide by zero                      ✗      2               MAE104   CVE-2017-3735    OOB read                               1


                                                                                          openssl
                                                                                                                                                             ✓
          AAH012    CVE-2016-10267       Divide by zero                      ✗      1               MAE105   CVE-2016-0797    Integer overflow               ✗       2
          AAH013    CVE-2016-10269       OOB read                            ✓      1               MAE106   CVE-2015-1790    0-pointer dereference          ✗       2
          AAH014    CVE-2016-10269       OOB read                            ✓      1               MAE107   CVE-2015-0288    0-pointer dereference          ✗       1
          AAH015    CVE-2016-10270       OOB read                                   4
libtiff




                                                                             ✓                      MAE108   CVE-2015-0208    0-pointer dereference          ✗       1
          AAH016    CVE-2015-8784        Heap buffer overflow                ✓      1               MAE109   CVE-2015-0286    Type confusion                 ✗       1
          AAH017    CVE-2019-7663        0-pointer dereference               ✓      1               MAE110   CVE-2015-0289    0-pointer dereference          ✗       1
          AAH018∗   CVE-2018-8905        Heap buffer underflow               ✓      1
                                                                                                    MAE111   CVE-2015-1788    Resource exhaustion (CPU)      ✗       1
          AAH019    CVE-2018-7456        OOB read                            ✗      1
                                                                                                    MAE112   CVE-2016-7052    0-pointer dereference          ✗       1
          AAH020    CVE-2016-3658        Heap buffer overflow                ✓      2
                                                                                                    MAE113   CVE-2016-6308    Resource exhaustion (memory)   ✗       2
          AAH021    CVE-2018-18557       OOB write                           ✗      2
                                                                                                    MAE114   CVE-2016-6305    Resource exhaustion (CPU)      ✗       1
          AAH022    CVE-2017-11613       Resource Exhaustion                 ✓      2
                                                                                                    MAE115   CVE-2016-6302    OOB read                       ✓       1
          AAH024    CVE-2017-9047        Stack buffer overflow               ✓      2
          AAH025    CVE-2017-0663        Type confusion                      ✓      1               JCH214   CVE-2019-9936    Heap buffer overflow           ✗       1
          AAH026    CVE-2017-7375        XML external entity                 ✓      1               JCH215   CVE-2019-20218   Stack buffer overread          ✓       1
          AAH027    CVE-2018-14567       Resource exhaustion                 ✗      1               JCH216   CVE-2019-19923   0-pointer dereference          ✓       1
          AAH028    CVE-2017-5130        Integer overflow, heap corruption   ✗      1               JCH217   CVE-2019-19959   OOB read                       ✗       1
          AAH029    CVE-2017-9048        Stack buffer overflow               ✓      2               JCH218   CVE-2019-19925   0-pointer dereference          ✗       1
          AAH030    CVE-2017-8872        OOB read                            ✗      2               JCH219   CVE-2019-19244   OOB read                       ✗       2
          AAH031    ISSUE #58 (gitlab)   OOB read                            ✗      1               JCH220   CVE-2018-8740    0-pointer dereference          ✗       1
libxml2




          AAH032    CVE-2015-8317        OOB read                            ✓      2               JCH221   CVE-2017-15286   0-pointer dereference          ✗       1
          AAH033    CVE-2016-4449        XML external entity                 ✗      1               JCH222   CVE-2017-2520    Heap buffer overflow           ✗       2
                                                                                          sqlite3




          AAH034    CVE-2016-1834        Heap buffer overflow                ✗      2               JCH223   CVE-2017-2518    Use-after-free                 ✓       1
          AAH035    CVE-2016-1836        Use-after-free                      ✓      2               JCH225   CVE-2017-10989   Heap buffer overflow           ✗       1
          AAH036    CVE-2016-1837        Use-after-free                      ✗      1               JCH226   CVE-2019-19646   Logical error                  ✓       2
          AAH037    CVE-2016-1838        Heap buffer overread                ✓      2               JCH227   CVE-2013-7443    Heap buffer overflow           ✓       1
          AAH038    CVE-2016-1839        Heap buffer overread                ✗      1               JCH228   CVE-2019-19926   Logical error                  ✓       1
          AAH039    BUG 758518           Heap buffer overread                ✗      1               JCH229   CVE-2019-19317   Resource exhaustion (memory)   ✓       1
          AAH040    CVE-2016-1840        Heap buffer overflow                ✗      1               JCH230   CVE-2015-3415    Double-free                    ✗       1
          AAH041    CVE-2016-1762        Heap buffer overread                ✓      1               JCH231   CVE-2020-9327    0-pointer dereference          ✗       3
          AAH042    CVE-2019-14494       Divide-by-zero                      ✓      1               JCH232   CVE-2015-3414    Uninitialized memory access    ✓       1
          AAH043    CVE-2019-9959        Resource exhaustion (memory)        ✓      1               JCH233   CVE-2015-3416    Stack buffer overflow          ✗       1
          AAH045    CVE-2017-9865        Stack buffer overflow               ✓      4               JCH234   CVE-2019-19880   0-pointer dereference          ✗       1
          AAH046    CVE-2019-10873       0-pointer dereference               ✓      2
          AAH047∗   CVE-2019-12293       Heap buffer overread                ✓      1               MAE002   CVE-2019-9021    Heap buffer overread           ✗       1
          AAH048    CVE-2019-10872       Heap buffer overflow                ✓      3               MAE004   CVE-2019-9641    Uninitialized memory access    ✗       1
          AAH049    CVE-2019-9200        Heap buffer underwrite              ✓      1               MAE006   CVE-2019-11041   OOB read                       ✗       1
          AAH050    Bug #106061          Divide-by-zero                      ✓      1               MAE008   CVE-2019-11034   OOB read                       ✓       1
          AAH051∗   ossfuzz/8499         Integer overflow                    ✓      1               MAE009   CVE-2019-11039   OOB read                       ✗       1
          AAH052    Bug #101366          0-pointer dereference               ✓      1               MAE010   CVE-2019-11040   Heap buffer overflow           ✗       1
poppler




          JCH201    CVE-2019-7310        Heap buffer overflow                ✓      1               MAE011   CVE-2018-20783   OOB read                       ✗       3
          JCH202    CVE-2018-21009       Integer overflow                           1               MAE012   CVE-2019-9022    OOB read                       ✗       2
                                                                                          php




                                                                             ✗
          JCH203    CVE-2018-20650       Type confusion                      ✗      2               MAE014   CVE-2019-9638    Uninitialized memory access    ✓       1
          JCH204    CVE-2018-20481       0-pointer dereference               ✗      1               MAE015   CVE-2019-9640    OOB read                       ✗       2
          JCH206    CVE-2018-19058       Type confusion                      ✗      2               MAE016   CVE-2018-14883   Heap buffer overread           ✓       2
          JCH207    CVE-2018-13988       OOB read                            ✓      1               MAE017   CVE-2018-7584    Stack buffer underread         ✗       1
          JCH208    CVE-2019-12360       Stack buffer overflow               ✗      1               MAE018   CVE-2017-11362   Stack buffer overflow          ✗       1
          JCH209    CVE-2018-10768       0-pointer dereference               ✓      1               MAE019   CVE-2014-9912    OOB write                      ✗       1
          JCH210    CVE-2017-9776        Integer overflow                    ✓      1               MAE020   CVE-2016-10159   Integer overflow               ✗       2
          JCH211    CVE-2017-18267       Resource exhaustion (CPU)           ✗      1               MAE021   CVE-2016-7414    OOB read                       ✗       2
          JCH212    CVE-2017-14617       Divide-by-zero                      ✓      1
          JCH214    CVE-2019-12493       Stack buffer overread               ✗      3




Received August 2020; revised September 2020; accepted October 2020




                                         Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
49:26                                                                                                                              A. Hazimeh, et al.

Table A2. Mean bug survival times—both Reached and Triggered—over a 24-hour period, in seconds, minutes,
and hours. Bugs are sorted by “difficulty” (mean times). The best performing fuzzer is highlighted in green
(ties are not included).
             moptafl            honggfuzz             afl++                afl              aflfast           fairfuzz           symccafl           Mean
Bug ID        R         T         R       T           R         T         R       T         R         T        R         T         R      T         R       T
AAH037    10.00s    20.00s    10.00s    10.00s    10.00s    45.50s     5.00s 15.00s      5.00s    15.00s    5.00s    15.00s    10.00s 25.50s     7.86s 20.86s
AAH041    15.00s    21.00s    10.00s    10.00s    15.00s    48.00s    10.00s 15.00s     10.00s    15.00s   10.00s    15.00s    15.00s 30.00s    12.14s 22.00s
AAH003    10.00s    16.00s    10.00s    11.00s    10.00s    15.00s     5.00s 10.00s      5.00s    10.00s    5.00s    10.00s    10.00s 1.58m      7.86s 23.86s
JCH207    10.00s    1.12m      5.00s    1.57m     10.00s    1.94m      5.00s 2.05m       5.00s    1.60m     5.00s    1.42m     10.00s 1.62m      7.14s 1.62m
AAH056    15.00s   14.57m     10.00s   14.43m     15.00s   19.49m     10.00s 13.07m     10.00s   11.27m    10.00s    8.17m     15.00s 17.80m    12.14s 14.11m
AAH015    32.50s    1.57m     10.00s    13.50s    27.00s   17.50m     1.18m 34.59m      52.00s   10.84m    1.07m    10.86m    15.07m    1.02h   2.76m 19.55m
AAH055    15.00s   40.86m     10.00s    2.71m     15.00s     3.62h    10.00s 25.01m     10.00s     2.24h   10.00s     6.36h    15.00s   2.44h   12.14s   2.26h
AAH020     5.00s     2.32h     5.00s     2.12h     5.00s   31.62m      5.00s   2.01h     5.00s   55.17m     5.00s   49.92m      5.00s 11.22h     5.00s   2.85h
MAE016    10.00s    1.57m      5.00s    10.00s    10.00s    5.79m      5.00s 3.97m       5.00s    4.93m     5.00s     2.21h    24.00h 24.00h     3.43h   3.78h
AAH052    15.00s    3.17m     15.00s   14.10m     15.00s   45.03m     10.00s   3.94h    10.00s    10.56h   10.00s    12.02h    15.00s 5.28m     12.86s   3.95h
AAH032    15.00s    3.38m      5.00s    2.06m     15.00s     1.65h    10.00s   3.22h    10.00s   34.19m    10.00s     9.67h    15.00s 12.95h    11.43s   4.02h
MAE008    15.00s     1.42h    10.00s     9.73h    15.00s    1.44m     10.00s 1.14m      10.00s    1.54m    10.00s    12.08h    24.00h 24.00h     3.43h   6.76h
AAH022    32.50s   54.98m     10.00s   34.86m     27.00s     3.47h    1.18m    9.38h    52.00s     5.66h   1.07m     14.04h   15.07m 15.25h     2.76m    7.04h
MAE014    15.00s     1.11h    10.00s     4.11h    15.00s   14.52m     10.00s 5.58m      10.00s    8.28m    10.00s    21.83h    24.00h 24.00h     3.43h   7.36h
JCH215    2.14m      3.24h    15.00s   40.97m    22.30m     11.97h     2.37h 15.67h    48.87m     11.51h    3.23h     9.86h     1.85h 18.08h     1.24h 10.15h
AAH017     5.19h     5.20h    22.32h    22.32h    13.97h    13.97h    19.84h 19.84h      8.67h     9.20h    5.92h     5.92h     9.92h   9.92h   12.26h 12.34h
JCH232     4.87h     4.87h   43.86m      1.66h    14.87h    20.02h    19.82h 19.82h     14.93h    17.21h    6.23h    10.31h    21.81h 21.81h    11.89h 13.67h
AAH014    12.48h    12.48h    24.00h    24.00h    13.06h    13.06h     6.34h   6.34h    24.00h    24.00h   18.46h    18.46h    10.68h 10.68h    15.57h 15.57h
JCH201    15.00s    14.65h    10.00s    24.00h    15.00s    19.48h    10.00s 16.82h     10.00s    12.98h   10.00s    14.02h    15.00s 14.27h    12.14s 16.60h
AAH007    15.00s    24.00h     5.00s    57.00s    15.00s    24.00h    10.00s 24.00h     10.00s    24.00h   10.00s    24.00h    15.00s 23.12m    11.43s 17.20h
AAH008    15.00s    16.51h    10.00s     3.65h    15.00s    23.40h    10.00s 19.44h     10.00s    19.66h   10.00s    15.28h    15.00s 23.43h    12.14s 17.34h
AAH045    20.00s     3.33h    13.50s     1.13h    20.00s    24.00h    15.00s 24.00h     15.00s    24.00h   15.00s    24.00h    20.00s 24.00h    16.93s 17.78h
AAH013    24.00h    24.00h     4.05h     4.05h    13.88h    13.88h    24.00h 24.00h     24.00h    24.00h   24.00h    24.00h    24.00h 24.00h    19.70h 19.70h
AAH024    15.00s     9.05h    10.00s     9.27h    15.00s    24.00h    10.00s 24.00h     10.00s    24.00h   10.00s    24.00h    15.00s 24.00h    12.14s 19.76h
JCH209   14.40m    14.41m     24.00h    24.00h    24.00h    24.00h    24.00h 24.00h     24.00h    24.00h   24.00h    24.00h    24.00h 24.00h    20.61h 20.61h
MAE115    15.00s    22.64h    10.00s    20.96h    15.00s    24.00h    10.00s 21.32h     10.00s    23.33h   10.00s    21.97h    15.00s 10.13h    12.14s 20.62h
AAH026    15.00s    20.88h    10.00s     7.00h    15.00s    24.00h    10.00s 24.00h     10.00s    24.00h   10.00s    24.00h    15.00s 24.00h    12.14s 21.13h
AAH001    15.00s    22.57h    10.00s    17.70h    15.00s    24.00h    10.00s 22.60h     10.00s    24.00h   10.00s    24.00h    15.00s 14.58h    12.14s 21.35h
MAE104    15.00s    15.53h    10.00s    24.00h    15.00s    24.00h    10.00s 21.81h     10.00s    17.60h   10.00s    24.00h    24.00h 24.00h     3.43h 21.56h
AAH010    21.35h    21.97h    12.53h    16.40h   14.59m     20.34h   10.18m 24.00h      24.00h    24.00h   13.81h    21.79h     4.76h 24.00h    10.98h 21.79h
AAH016    18.68h    19.66h    24.00h    24.00h    22.59h    22.59h    24.00h 24.00h     17.61h    19.83h   19.89h    19.97h    24.00h 24.00h    21.54h 22.01h
JCH226    23.20h    23.72h     4.09h    10.93h    24.00h    24.00h    24.00h 24.00h     24.00h    24.00h   24.00h    24.00h    24.00h 24.00h    21.04h 22.09h
JCH228    12.33h    18.10h     2.47h    20.05h    22.07h    24.00h    22.57h 22.60h     24.00h    24.00h   18.78h    24.00h    22.66h 23.80h    17.84h 22.36h
AAH035    15.00s    19.34h    10.00s    24.00h    21.50s    24.00h    10.00s 24.00h     10.00s    24.00h   10.00s    24.00h    19.00s 24.00h    13.64s 23.33h
JCH212    15.00s    24.00h    10.00s    20.42h    15.00s    24.00h    10.00s 24.00h     10.00s    24.00h   10.00s    24.00h    15.00s 24.00h    12.14s 23.49h
AAH025    22.22h    22.22h    22.48h    22.48h    24.00h    24.00h    24.00h 24.00h     24.00h    24.00h   24.00h    24.00h    24.00h 24.00h    23.53h 23.53h
AAH053    24.00h    24.00h    35.00s    21.80h    24.00h    24.00h    30.00s 24.00h     29.50s    24.00h   26.00s    24.00h    24.00h 24.00h    10.29h 23.69h
AAH042    39.50s    21.93h    20.00s    24.00h    39.50s    24.00h    40.00s 24.00h     34.50s    24.00h   31.00s    24.00h    45.00s 24.00h    35.64s 23.70h
AAH048    15.00s    24.00h    10.00s    22.72h    16.50s    24.00h    15.00s 24.00h     10.50s    24.00h   10.00s    24.00h    20.00s 24.00h    13.86s 23.82h
AAH049    15.00s    22.82h    10.00s    24.00h    15.00s    24.00h    10.00s 24.00h     10.00s    24.00h   10.00s    24.00h    15.00s 24.00h    12.14s 23.83h
AAH043    25.00s    22.91h    16.80h    24.00h     2.41h    24.00h    25.00s 24.00h     20.00s    24.00h   20.00s    24.00h    25.00s 24.00h     2.75h 23.84h
JCH210    30.00s    23.07h    20.00s    24.00h    33.00s    24.00h    30.00s 24.00h     25.00s    24.00h   25.00s    24.00h    32.50s 24.00h    27.93s 23.87h
AAH050    25.00s    24.00h    16.80h    23.71h    29.00s    24.00h    24.00h 24.00h     20.00s    24.00h   20.00s    24.00h    29.00s 24.00h     5.83h 23.96h




Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark                                                                                                                    49:27

Table A2. Mean bug survival times (cont.). None of these bugs were triggered by the seven evaluated fuzzers.
             moptafl          honggfuzz             afl++                  afl                aflfast            fairfuzz          symccafl           Mean
Bug ID        R        T        R       T           R        T        R              T         R        T          R        T        R      T         R        T
AAH054    10.00s   24.00h     5.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    5.00s         24.00h     5.00s   24.00h     5.00s   24.00h   10.00s   24.00h    7.14s   24.00h
MAE105    10.00s   24.00h     5.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    5.00s         24.00h     5.00s   24.00h     5.00s   24.00h   10.00s   24.00h    7.14s   24.00h
AAH011    10.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h   10.00s         24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h   10.00s   24.00h   10.00s   24.00h
AAH005    15.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    15.00s   24.00h   10.00s         24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h   15.00s   24.00h   12.14s   24.00h
JCH202    15.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    15.00s   24.00h   10.00s         24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h   15.00s   24.00h   12.14s   24.00h
MAE114    15.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    15.00s   24.00h   10.00s         24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h   15.00s   24.00h   12.14s   24.00h
AAH029    15.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    15.00s   24.00h   10.00s         24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h   15.00s   24.00h   12.14s   24.00h
AAH034    15.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    15.00s   24.00h   10.00s         24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h   15.00s   24.00h   12.14s   24.00h
AAH004    16.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    15.00s   24.00h   10.00s         24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h   15.00s   24.00h   12.29s   24.00h
MAE111    15.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    15.00s   24.00h   10.00s         24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h   20.00s   24.00h   12.86s   24.00h
AAH059    20.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    17.00s   24.00h   15.00s         24.00h    15.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h   20.00s   24.00h   15.29s   24.00h
JCH204    18.00s   24.00h    20.00s   24.00h    15.50s   24.00h   15.00s         24.00h    15.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h   20.00s   24.00h   16.21s   24.00h
AAH031    20.00s   24.00h    15.00s   24.00h    42.00s   24.00h   15.00s         24.00h    15.00s   24.00h    15.00s   24.00h   25.00s   24.00h   21.00s   24.00h
AAH051    25.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    42.50s   24.00h   20.00s         24.00h    20.00s   24.00h    20.00s   24.00h   30.00s   24.00h   23.93s   24.00h
MAE103    33.00s   24.00h    28.00s   24.00h    33.00s   24.00h   27.50s         24.00h    25.00s   24.00h    20.00s   24.00h   31.00s   24.00h   28.21s   24.00h
JCH214    33.50s   24.00h    45.00s   24.00h    36.00s   24.00h   31.00s         24.00h    26.50s   24.00h    25.00s   24.00h   35.00s   24.00h   33.14s   24.00h
JCH220    4.38m    24.00h    11.50s   24.00h   22.04m    24.00h    2.09h         24.00h   54.77m    24.00h     3.12h   24.00h    2.28h   24.00h    1.26h   24.00h
JCH229    4.53m    24.00h    16.00s   24.00h   24.62m    24.00h    2.80h         24.00h     1.07h   24.00h     3.23h   24.00h    2.32h   24.00h    1.42h   24.00h
AAH018   41.88m    24.00h    4.00m    24.00h     5.77h   24.00h    3.17h         24.00h   59.96m    24.00h   36.01m    24.00h    1.85h   24.00h    1.88h   24.00h
JCH230    4.02m    24.00h    22.50s   24.00h     1.07h   24.00h    3.31h         24.00h     1.36h   24.00h     3.56h   24.00h    5.57h   24.00h    2.13h   24.00h
AAH047    25.00s   24.00h    16.80h   24.00h     2.41h   24.00h   25.00s         24.00h    20.00s   24.00h    20.00s   24.00h   25.00s   24.00h    2.75h   24.00h
JCH233    8.31m    24.00h   12.02m    24.00h     6.16h   24.00h    3.87h         24.00h     1.98h   24.00h     3.59h   24.00h    5.17h   24.00h    3.02h   24.00h
JCH223   16.59m    24.00h    30.50s   24.00h     1.19h   24.00h    3.89h         24.00h     1.33h   24.00h     4.03h   24.00h   10.60h   24.00h    3.05h   24.00h
JCH231   21.88m    24.00h    36.00s   24.00h     2.44h   24.00h    3.96h         24.00h     1.41h   24.00h     4.05h   24.00h   10.62h   24.00h    3.27h   24.00h
MAE006    15.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    15.00s   24.00h   10.00s         24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h   24.00h   24.00h    3.43h   24.00h
MAE004    15.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    15.00s   24.00h   10.00s         24.00h    10.00s   24.00h    10.00s   24.00h   24.00h   24.00h    3.43h   24.00h
JCH222     1.75h   24.00h   21.97m    24.00h    18.91h   24.00h   15.17h         24.00h    13.39h   24.00h    18.87h   24.00h   20.82h   24.00h   12.75h   24.00h
AAH009    14.61h   24.00h    20.62h   24.00h    24.00h   24.00h    5.67h         24.00h    19.45h   24.00h    17.62h   24.00h   23.42h   24.00h   17.91h   24.00h
JCH227    24.00h   24.00h    20.58h   24.00h    24.00h   24.00h   24.00h         24.00h    24.00h   24.00h    24.00h   24.00h   24.00h   24.00h   23.51h   24.00h
JCH219    23.41h   24.00h    23.22h   24.00h    24.00h   24.00h   24.00h         24.00h    23.79h   24.00h    24.00h   24.00h   24.00h   24.00h   23.77h   24.00h
JCH216    23.48h   24.00h    24.00h   24.00h    24.00h   24.00h   24.00h         24.00h    24.00h   24.00h    24.00h   24.00h   24.00h   24.00h   23.93h   24.00h




                            Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
49:28                                                                                                                                         A. Hazimeh, et al.

                                       Table A3. Mean bug survival times over a 7-day period.
             moptafl            honggfuzz              afl++                    afl                  aflfast            fairfuzz            symccafl             Mean
Bug ID        R         T         R       T            R         T         R               T         R         T         R         T          R        T         R         T
AAH037    10.00s    20.00s    15.00s     15.00s    10.00s    45.50s    10.00s          20.00s    10.00s    20.00s    10.00s    21.00s    10.00s    25.50s    10.71s    23.86s
AAH041    15.00s    21.00s    15.00s     15.00s    15.00s    48.00s    15.00s          20.50s    15.00s    20.00s    15.00s    21.00s    15.00s    30.00s    15.00s    25.07s
AAH003    10.00s    16.00s    15.00s     17.00s    10.00s    15.00s    10.00s          15.00s    10.00s    15.00s    10.00s    15.00s    10.00s    1.58m     10.71s    26.86s
JCH207    10.00s    1.12m     10.00s     2.16m     10.00s    1.94m     10.00s          2.02m     10.00s    3.73m     10.00s    2.96m     10.00s    1.62m     10.00s    2.22m
AAH056    15.00s   14.57m     15.00s    19.65m     15.00s   19.49m     15.00s         16.75m     15.00s   14.69m     15.00s   11.16m     15.00s   17.80m     15.00s   16.30m
AAH015    32.50s    1.57m     15.00s     21.50s    27.00s   17.50m     1.40m          59.27m     1.12m     8.00m     1.23m    13.34m    15.07m      1.02h    2.87m    23.04m
AAH020     5.00s     2.32h     5.00s      2.37h     5.00s   31.62m      5.00s           2.40h     5.00s   49.68m      5.00s   49.06m      5.00s    11.22h     5.00s     2.93h
AAH052    15.00s    3.17m     18.00s    15.09m     15.00s   45.03m     15.00s           3.83h    15.00s     6.17h    15.00s    13.78h    15.00s    5.28m     15.43s     3.56h
AAH022    32.50s   54.98m     15.00s    19.83m     27.00s     3.47h    1.40m           19.31h    1.12m      3.54h    1.23m     11.50h   15.07m     15.63h    2.87m      7.81h
AAH055    15.00s   40.86m     15.00s     4.07m     15.00s     3.62h    15.00s           4.17h    15.00s     1.74h    15.00s    71.84h    15.00s     2.44h    15.00s    12.08h
AAH017    13.22h    13.23h    66.80h     66.84h    13.97h    13.97h    13.88h          14.38h     6.78h     6.78h     3.50h     3.53h     9.92h     9.92h    18.30h    18.38h
AAH032    15.00s    3.38m     10.00s     2.70m     15.00s     1.65h    15.00s          51.23h    15.00s   15.81m     15.00s    67.23h    15.00s    36.05h    14.29s    22.36h
MAE016    10.00s    1.57m     10.00s     15.00s    10.00s    5.79m     10.00s          2.38m     10.00s    6.25m     10.00s     3.13h   168.00h   168.00h    24.00h    24.49h
JCH215    2.14m      3.24h    23.50s      2.42h   22.30m     13.00h     1.87h          45.83h   21.33m     15.91h   48.42m     38.01h     1.85h    85.15h   45.45m     29.08h
MAE008    15.00s     1.42h    15.00s     14.11h    15.00s    1.44m     15.00s          3.87m     15.00s    2.25m     15.00s    33.70h   168.00h   168.00h    24.00h    31.05h
JCH201    15.00s    17.54h    15.00s    140.14h    15.00s    20.53h    15.00s          11.25h    15.00s    13.41h    15.00s    13.95h    15.00s    14.27h    15.00s    33.01h
MAE014    15.00s     1.11h    15.00s    55.08m     15.00s   14.52m     15.00s          4.37m     15.00s   10.03m     15.00s   154.13h   168.00h   168.00h    24.00h    46.38h
AAH014    14.52h    14.52h   122.24h    122.24h    13.06h    13.06h    18.54h          18.54h   143.74h   143.74h    75.78h    75.78h    38.20h    38.20h    60.87h    60.87h
JCH232     4.87h     4.87h   44.67m       2.35h    26.08h    48.03h    83.73h         117.35h    31.74h    50.30h    34.90h   101.98h   105.04h   117.65h    41.01h    63.22h
MAE115    15.00s    61.48h    15.00s    109.18h    15.00s   133.93h    15.00s          47.46h    15.00s    32.83h    15.00s    94.71h    15.00s    10.13h    15.00s    69.96h
AAH008    15.00s    32.45h    15.00s      3.39h    15.00s   141.24h    15.00s          25.27h    15.00s   126.02h    15.00s   117.94h    15.00s    55.21h    15.00s    71.65h
JCH209   14.40m    14.41m    168.00h    168.00h    63.14h    63.14h    62.32h          62.33h    44.40h    44.41h   154.76h   154.76h    49.70h    49.72h    77.51h    77.51h
MAE104    15.00s    57.64h    15.00s    168.00h    15.00s   109.74h    15.00s         114.85h    15.00s    51.48h    15.00s    40.27h   168.00h   168.00h    24.00h   101.43h
AAH010    41.60h    44.03h    22.39h     42.87h   14.59m    121.14h   14.80m          168.00h   139.00h   150.52h    39.15h   136.06h    19.16h    65.62h    37.40h   104.04h
JCH228    16.37h    35.61h     6.97h     60.72h    94.73h   117.15h   128.84h         153.74h    58.00h   111.25h   104.22h   126.98h   129.87h   146.81h    77.00h   107.47h
AAH007    15.00s   168.00h    10.00s     1.56m     15.00s   167.02h    15.00s         163.55h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   23.12m     14.29s   119.28h
AAH045    20.00s     3.33h    20.00s    21.44m     20.00s   168.00h    20.00s         168.00h    20.00s   164.38h    20.00s   168.00h    20.00s   164.86h    20.00s   119.56h
AAH013   168.00h   168.00h     2.40h      2.40h    13.88h    13.88h   168.00h         168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   122.33h   122.33h
AAH016    49.04h    50.76h   140.25h    141.75h    44.30h   137.79h    81.63h         146.06h   110.77h   125.20h   120.45h   120.48h   154.66h   155.00h   100.16h   125.29h
AAH001    15.00s   152.17h    15.00s     12.17h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s         144.94h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s    76.79h    15.00s   127.15h
AAH024    15.00s     9.05h    15.00s     52.37h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   128.77h
AAH026    15.00s    77.04h    15.00s     15.91h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   133.28h
JCH226    54.49h    87.37h     3.58h     19.05h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h         168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   152.61h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   126.10h   135.20h
AAH049    15.00s    45.24h    15.00s    168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   150.46h
JCH210    30.00s    63.56h    25.00s    155.54h    33.00s   168.00h    35.00s         168.00h    30.00s   168.00h    33.50s   168.00h    32.50s   168.00h    31.29s   151.30h
AAH035    15.00s    83.58h    15.00s    168.00h    21.50s   168.00h    15.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    19.00s   168.00h    16.50s   155.94h
JCH212    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s     94.40h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   157.49h
JCH227    68.10h   121.28h   110.51h    158.09h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h         168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   145.52h   159.91h
AAH025   139.13h   139.13h   155.04h    155.04h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h         168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   162.02h   162.02h
AAH043    25.00s   126.83h   168.00h    168.00h    16.81h   168.00h    26.50s         168.00h    25.00s   168.00h    25.00s   168.00h    25.00s   168.00h    26.41h   162.12h
AAH048    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s    128.38h    16.50s   168.00h    20.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    20.00s   168.00h    16.64s   162.34h
AAH050    25.00s   143.70h   151.20h    159.73h    29.00s   168.00h    33.61h         168.00h    28.00s   168.00h    29.00s   168.00h    29.00s   168.00h    26.41h   163.35h
JCH216    69.76h   142.55h   168.00h    168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h         168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   153.97h   164.36h
AAH046    75.34h   149.74h   168.00h    168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h         168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   154.76h   165.39h
AAH042    39.50s   151.53h    24.00s    168.00h    39.50s   168.00h    45.00s         168.00h    40.00s   168.00h    39.50s   168.00h    45.00s   168.00h    38.93s   165.65h
AAH009    21.86h   157.44h   104.71h    168.00h   125.76h   168.00h     6.48h         168.00h    56.27h   168.00h    29.35h   168.00h    24.07h   168.00h    52.64h   166.49h
JCH223   16.59m    158.18h    31.50s    168.00h     1.19h   168.00h     5.90h         168.00h     2.57h   168.00h     1.47h   168.00h    11.94h   168.00h     3.34h   166.60h
AAH029    15.00s   166.95h    15.00s    168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   167.85h
JCH229    4.53m    167.67h    24.00s    168.00h   24.62m    168.00h     2.09h         168.00h   49.24m    168.00h   49.67m    168.00h     2.32h   168.00h   56.19m    167.95h




Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
Magma: A Ground-Truth Fuzzing Benchmark                                                                                                                              49:29

                                                 Table A3. Mean bug survival times (cont.).
             moptafl            honggfuzz             afl++                    afl                  aflfast            fairfuzz            symccafl             Mean
Bug ID       R          T         R       T           R         T         R               T         R         T         R         T          R        T         R         T
AAH054    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s         168.00h    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s   168.00h
AAH011    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s         168.00h    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s   168.00h
MAE105    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s   168.00h    10.00s         168.00h    10.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    10.00s   168.00h    10.71s   168.00h
AAH005    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h
JCH202    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h
MAE114    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h
AAH034    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h
AAH004    16.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.14s   168.00h
MAE111    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    20.00s   168.00h    15.71s   168.00h
AAH059    20.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    17.00s   168.00h    20.00s         168.00h    20.00s   168.00h    20.00s   168.00h    20.00s   168.00h    18.86s   168.00h
JCH204    18.00s   168.00h    24.00s   168.00h    15.50s   168.00h    20.00s         168.00h    20.00s   168.00h    19.00s   168.00h    20.00s   168.00h    19.50s   168.00h
AAH031    20.00s   168.00h    22.50s   168.00h    42.00s   168.00h    20.00s         168.00h    20.00s   168.00h    20.00s   168.00h    25.00s   168.00h    24.21s   168.00h
AAH051    25.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    42.50s   168.00h    25.00s         168.00h    25.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    30.00s   168.00h    25.36s   168.00h
JCH214    33.50s   168.00h    53.50s   168.00h    36.00s   168.00h    35.00s         168.00h    31.00s   168.00h    30.00s   168.00h    35.00s   168.00h    36.29s   168.00h
MAE103    33.00s   168.00h    1.05m    168.00h    33.00s   168.00h    40.00s         168.00h    33.50s   168.00h    30.00s   168.00h    31.00s   168.00h    37.64s   168.00h
JCH220    4.38m    168.00h    19.50s   168.00h   22.04m    168.00h     1.78h         168.00h   46.76m    168.00h   49.27m    168.00h     2.28h   168.00h   52.36m    168.00h
AAH018   41.88m    168.00h    5.81m    168.00h     5.77h   168.00h     1.72h         168.00h     1.60h   168.00h     1.40h   168.00h     1.85h   168.00h     1.88h   168.00h
JCH230    4.02m    168.00h    41.00s   168.00h     1.07h   168.00h     5.67h         168.00h     1.16h   168.00h     1.14h   168.00h     5.57h   168.00h     2.10h   168.00h
JCH233    8.31m    168.00h   23.55m    168.00h     6.16h   168.00h    11.84h         168.00h     1.44h   168.00h     2.41h   168.00h     5.17h   168.00h     3.93h   168.00h
JCH231   21.88m    168.00h    35.00s   168.00h     2.44h   168.00h     5.99h         168.00h     5.22h   168.00h     1.69h   168.00h    11.96h   168.00h     3.95h   168.00h
MAE006    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h    24.00h   168.00h
MAE004    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s         168.00h    15.00s   168.00h    15.00s   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h    24.00h   168.00h
AAH047    25.00s   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h    16.81h   168.00h    26.50s         168.00h    25.00s   168.00h    25.00s   168.00h    25.00s   168.00h    26.41h   168.00h
JCH222     1.75h   168.00h   39.17m    168.00h   113.15h   168.00h   151.50h         168.00h    57.91h   168.00h    71.58h   168.00h   136.02h   168.00h    76.08h   168.00h
JCH219    72.02h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   162.32h   168.00h   168.00h         168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   168.00h   153.48h   168.00h




                               Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., Vol. 4, No. 3, Article 49. Publication date: December 2020.
